It appears increasingly unlikely PM will hit deadline for deal laid down in Benn Act

Boris Johnson is careering towards a fresh constitutional crisis, after insisting there will be “no delay” to Brexit just hours after government lawyers promised he would obey the law and request an extension if he failed to clinch a deal within a fortnight.

The prime minister tweeted that there must be “new deal or no deal – but no delay”, echoing the words he used in his party conference speech in Manchester on Wednesday.

Boris Johnson (@BorisJohnson) New deal or no deal - but no delay. #GetBrexitDone #LeaveOct31 🇬🇧

But with Brussels refusing the UK’s request for intensive Brexit negotiations to continue through the weekend, it appears increasingly likely Johnson will fail to hit the deadline for a deal laid down in what he calls the “surrender act”.

EU sources said there remained considerable doubt as to whether there was any basis for such discussions, given Johnson’s insistence on there being a customs border on the island of Ireland.

Meanwhile Julian Smith, the Northern Ireland secretary, was told by a series of senior figures in Belfast that the “Stormont lock” envisaged in the proposal is unworkable, setting up a race against time to rework that aspect of the plan in time for the 17 October European council meeting.

Boris Johnson's Brexit plan hangs by thread as EU dismisses weekend talks Read more

The European Union (Withdrawal) (No. 2) Act, drawn up by rebel MPs and passed by parliament, states that if Westminster does not agree to a Brexit deal by 19 October, the prime minister has to write to the EU seeking an extension to article 50 until 31 January.

In extracts of legal papers submitted by the government to the court of session in Edinburgh, that emerged on Friday in a case brought by anti-Brexit campaigners, the government appeared to accept for the first time that it would have to make the request.

The papers, which the government declined to publish in full, stated that the prime minister accepts “he is subject to the public law principle that he cannot frustrate its purpose or the purpose of its provisions. Thus he cannot act so as to prevent the letter requesting the specified extension in the act from being sent.”

Campaigners brought the legal action to force Johnson to comply with the requirements of the Benn Act, after a series of suggestions from Downing Street sources that Johnson believes he has found a loophole in the law that will allow him to leave the EU on 31 October regardless.

The UK government refused to release copies of its submissions in this case to the media despite repeated requests by the Guardian, the BBC and other news organisations.

Key excerpts of its pledge were read out instead by Aidan O’Neill QC, the lawyer for the green energy millionaire Dale Vince, the SNP MP Joanna Cherry QC, and the lawyer and anti-Brexit campaigner Jolyon Maugham QC.

O’Neill told Lord Pentland, the judge hearing the case, that Johnson had repeatedly contradicted that position, including in the Commons on Wednesday, by insisting the UK would leave on 31 October “come what may”.

As a result, O’Neill said, the court still needed to issue legally binding orders to force Johnson to comply with the Benn Act in an interdict, or injunction. If the prime minister refused to do so, O’Neill could return to court to ask for Johnson to be fined or jailed, he added.

No 10 declined to comment. Yet senior government figures, including some cabinet ministers, continue to insist privately that while they will obey the law as narrowly interpreted, they can still avoid any delay to Brexit.

An attempt to circumvent the law would almost certainly result in another bitter court battle for the government – but Johnson’s allies hope he could thereby present himself as the man trying to “get Brexit done” in the face of obstructionist remainers.

With a Brexit delay forced on him, Johnson could then fight a general election on a platform of a hard Brexit.

Senior government insiders suggest that to confront the challenge from the Brexit party, the Conservatives would have to promise to strike an even tougher bargain than the one the prime minister is currently offering to Brussels.

The backbench rebels who drew up the Benn bill hoped to avert a no-deal Brexit; but Johnson has angrily accused them of undermining the government’s negotiating position.

In Brussels on Friday, a European commission spokeswoman said: “We have completed discussions with the UK for today. We gave our initial reaction to the UK’s proposals and asked many questions on the legal text.

“We will meet again on Monday to give the UK another opportunity to present its proposals in detail.” The spokeswoman added that the proposals did not “provide a basis for concluding an agreement”.

A senior EU diplomat said: “If we held talks at the weekend, it would look like these were proper negotiations. The truth is we’re still a long way from that. We need to work out quickly whether there is the opportunity to close that gap.”

But the Irish deputy prime minister, Simon Coveney, speaking after a meeting in Belfast with the Northern Ireland secretary, struck a more upbeat note, saying a deal was “not mission impossible”.

“I believe it is possible to change that [approach including the old backstop] but we have to make sure that while we change the approach the outcome has got to be the same,” he said, adding that he believed “it’s possible to do that with goodwill and energy on all sides” next week.

But Smith was told by several parties at the meeting that the proposal, backed by the DUP, to give the devolved government the final say on Brexit arrangements in the region after Brexit was a non-starter.

One source with knowledge of the meeting said: “The message has gone back from all quarters in Northern Ireland from Sinn Féin to the Traditional Unionist Voice that this is unworkable and it will destabilise the institutions and the Good Friday agreement and is not plausible – and in light of that, if he is serious about getting a deal, he has to come back with something more realistic.”Prince Harry has issued legal proceedings against the owners of the Sun and the Daily Mirror over alleged phone hacking, in an escalation of his all-out war with the British newspaper industry.

The decision follows Harry’s strongly worded attack on the British media’s treatment of his wife, Meghan, Duchess of Sussex.

Buckingham Palace confirmed claims had been filed at the high court regarding alleged illegal interception of voicemail messages. News Group, which published the News of the World until its closure as well as the Sun, confirmed a claim had been issued.

There were no details on the nature of the intended claims but they were filed by Clintons, a law firm that has brought multiple phone-hacking claims in the past and won substantial payouts on behalf of its clients.

Although the royal household did not provide any details on their nature, legal sources suggested they were likely to relate to historical incidents of phone hacking in the 2000s.

It was the News of the World’s decision to hack the voicemails of Prince William that led to the start of the wider phone-hacking scandal, although until now royals had stayed out of the long-running civil cases against newspapers.

The filings were made days before Meghan launched a separate legal action against the Mail on Sunday for alleged breach of privacy and copyright infringement over its decision to publish a private letter she had sent to her estranged father.

Court filings of 27 September, first reported by Byline Investigates, suggest two separate claims were made in the prince’s name against Rupert Murdoch’s News Group Newspapers and the Reach plc subsidiary MGN Ltd last week.

Harry and Meghan are celebrities, but that doesn’t mean they owe us everything | Gaby Hinsliff Read more

Issuing proceedings is the first court step of possible legal action against a defendant. Once papers are lodged with the court, the claimant has four months to decide whether to proceed with the action by serving the defendant. Until that action has been taken, it would be possible for a defendant to be unaware of the content of the claim.

Meghan’s decision to sue the publisher of the Mail on Sunday – announced as Harry launched a deeply personal attack on the British tabloid press – was widely viewed as a significant shift in the couple’s approach to privacy issues.

In that case, Meghan and Harry, who are on a 10-day tour of southern Africa, employed the libel lawyers Schillings using private funds.

Harry accused parts of the media of “waging campaigns against individuals with no thought to the consequences”.

Emphasising his respect for the importance of “objective, truthful reporting”, he added: “Though this action may not be the safe one, it is the right one … I’ve seen what happens when someone I love is commoditised to the point that they are no longer treated or seen as a real person.

“I lost my mother and now I watch my wife falling victim to the same powerful forces.”

Hostilities between Harry and the tabloid press have been escalating since his relationship with Meghan began. When the story that the two were a couple broke, he criticised “racial overtones” in reporting.

Last week, it emerged he had complained to the BBC for broadcasting and publishing online an image from a neo-Nazi social media site that called him a “race traitor” and depicted the royal with a gun pointed at his head.

Although the BBC internally and the broadcasting watchdog, Ofcom, rejected the complaint, ruling the use of the image in a report about the activities of the group was in the public interest, the BBC apologised for not warning the prince in advance.18:35

The senior White House adviser Stephen Miller recently claimed the impeachment inquiry imperilling Donald Trump’s presidency was a product of the “deep state”, a conspiracy theory which holds that a permanent government of civil servants and security operatives exists to thwart the will of the people.

But according to Steve Bannon, Trump’s former 2016 campaign chair and White House strategist, a prime mover in the formation and propagation of the deep state conspiracy theory, it should not be taken seriously.

Bannon in winter. Literally. Also at the Vatican, earlier this year. Photograph: Marco Bonomo/AP

Bannon states his opinion in a new book, Deep State: Trump, the FBI and the Rule of Law by James B Stewart, which will be published on 8 October. The Guardian obtained a copy.

The “deep state conspiracy theory is for nut cases”, Bannon is quoted as saying, because “America isn’t Turkey or Egypt”.

There is a formidable government bureaucracy in the US, he adds, but “there’s nothing ‘deep’ about it. It’s right in your face.”

Read further.French counter-terrorism police have taken over the inquiry into an attack by a state employee who killed four colleagues with a kitchen knife inside Paris’s police headquarters on Thursday.

The assailant, named in the media as Mickaël H, 45, was a computer scientist in the intelligence branch at police headquarters, and had worked for the police for 15 years. He had full security clearance in an office that coordinated counter-terrorist intelligence-gathering in the capital.

Counter-terrorist investigators are now investigating what led him to launch a knife attack on police officers he worked with, whether it was premeditated and whether he entered the building with his own knife.

At lunchtime on Thursday, deep inside the vast police complex near Notre Dame in the centre of Paris, the man took a ceramic knife and launched a killing spree which lasted only a few minutes. First, in an office in his own department, he killed three police intelligence officers. Then he took a stairway, killing another staff member and injuring two more before heading towards the exit. A young intern police officer, who had worked in the building for only a few days, called for the man to drop the knife. When he did not, the young officer shot him in the head, killing him.

There were no surviving witnesses from the room where he first attacked and killed three officers, so it is not clear what he may have said to them before the attack.

Initially the killings had been treated as homicides and investigated by regular police. As searches and checks continued at the assailant’s home, the counter-terrorism force was called in and police officials said nomotive was being ruled out.

Police on Friday continued to search the attacker’s home in a small town near Charles de Gaulle airport north of the city. Data from his computers and phones was also being assessed. Within hours of the attack, investigators in balaclavas were seen removing computer equipment from the property.

The assailant, who was French and born on the island of Martinique, had converted to Islam 18 months ago, but initial searches at his home were reported to have shown no sign of any radicalisation. He had not been on any watchlist.

The government spokeswoman Sibeth Ndiaye said on Friday morning that the possibility of a terror motive “has clearly not been ruled out”. But she added: “It is important to emphasise you are not a terrorist because you are Muslim and converting to Islam is not an automatic sign of radicalisation.” She told France Info radio: “The facts need to be looked at carefully.”

The interior minister, Christophe Castaner, said the assailant had “never shown any behavioural problems” and never aroused the “slightest reason for alarm”. The attacker was said to be a quiet and unassuming member of staff, and no change in his behaviour had been noted in the weeks before the attack.

Paris’s police chief, Didier Lallement, said on Friday that the force would be “forever marked by this drama. We will not forget.”

The attacker’s widow told investigators that her husband, who had a severe hearing disability, displayed “unusual and agitated behaviour” the night before his crime, a source close to the investigation told AFP. She was questioned all day on Friday.

The attack came a day after thousands of officers marched in Paris to protest against low wages, long hours and an increasing suicide rate in their ranks.US officials have been banned from supporting pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong, after Donald Trump reportedly promised the US would stay quiet during trade negotiations.

China celebrates 70th anniversary as Xi warns ‘no force can shake great nation’ Read more

Trump gave the undertaking to his Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping, in a phone call in June, according to CNN.

The report represents the latest revelation about Trump’s personal phone calls with foreign leaders, records of which were moved to a highly classified system, and have only started to emerge with the start of impeachment hearings in Congress.

As a result of the gag order, the US general counsel in Hong Kong, Kurt Tong, was told to cancel an appearance at a US thinktank and a planned speech on the protests that have shaken the territory for weeks.

Asked at the time whether Tong had been gagged because of trade talks, the state department spokeswoman, Morgan Ortagus, dismissed the suggestion as being “based off anonymous reports”.

“I don’t see much truth to that,” she said.

Tong spoke at the Centre for Strategic and International Studies after he left his post in July and said it was incumbent on the US government to “be frank … and be truthful about how we view the situation on the ground in Hong Kong”.

Asked about the Hong Kong protests in August, Trump told reporters: “Somebody said that at some point they’re going to want to stop that. But that’s between Hong Kong and that’s between China, because Hong Kong is a part of China. They’ll have to deal with that themselves. They don’t need advice.”

Trump has also refrained from commenting on China’s internment of over a million Uighur Muslims, despite the fact that his administration has made religious liberty one of its hallmark issues on the international stage.

At the United Nations general assembly last month, Trump organised a meeting on the subject in the UN headquarters building, clashing with a global summit on the climate emergency on the same day.

In the keynote speech on religious freedom, Trump did not mention China or the Uighurs at all, leaving it to his officials.

The assistant secretary of state for east Asian and Pacific affairs, David Stilwell, organised an event at the UN on “the human rights crisis in Xinjiang”.

Asked whether it made it harder to convince other countries to care about the issue when the US president did not mention it, Stilwell said: “Clearly, I don’t speak for the president.”

He noted that Mike Pence and the secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, had mentioned it in their own remarks.

“I would take it as it was presented, that this Uighur issue is just – it’s out there with all the rest of the issues,” Stilwell said.

US-Chinese trade negotiations are due to resume next week in Washington. Trump referred to the talks this week, when he suggested that Beijing start investigations into the finances of his political opponent, Joe Biden, and the former vice-president’s son, Hunter.As part of new strategy, the Netherlands will be official name at Eurovision in May

The Dutch government has decided to stop describing itself as Holland and will instead use only its real name – the Netherlands – as part of an attempted update of its global image.

The national rebranding, which has been signed up to by business leaders, the tourist board and central government, will be rolled out later this year.

Ministers want to shift the international focus from certain aspects of national life with which the country is commonly associated, such as its recreational drug culture and the red-light district of Amsterdam.

As part of the new strategy, the Netherlands will be the official brand at the Eurovision song contest, which takes place in Rotterdam next May, and during the Olympic Games in Tokyo in 2020.

The nation’s football team, which is often referred to abroad as Holland, will solely be called the Netherlands in any official setting.

A spokeswoman for the ministry of foreign affairs said the Netherlands needed a more uniform and coordinated national branding. She said: “We want to present the Netherlands as an open, inventive and inclusive country. We’ve modernised our approach.

“What is special is that agreement has now been reached with relevant parties from both the government, Netherlands Board of Tourism and Conventions and private organisations including top sectors and the Confederation of Netherlands Industry and Employers about the image of the Netherlands that we want to present to the rest of the world in a substantive and unambiguous manner.”

She said the government was taking a a user-friendly and pragmatic approach to its name in order to boost exports, tourism, sport and spread “Dutch culture, norms and values”. She said: “It has been agreed that the Netherlands, the official name of our country, should preferably be used.”

North and South Holland are provinces on the western coast of the Netherlands. From the 10th to the 16th century, Holland was one political unified entity and ruled by the counts of Holland.

By the 17th century it was the dominant part of what was then the Dutch Republic. The kingdom of the Netherlands, from the Dutch Neder-landen, meaning low countries, emerged out of the defeat of Napoleon at the Battle of Waterloo in 1815.

Earlier this year, the Dutch tourist board, whose website address is Holland.com, said it would be moving its focus from promoting the Netherlands as a whole to drawing attention instead to less well-known parts of the country.

As many as 42 million people are forecast to visit the country annually by 2030, up from 18 million in 2018. Amsterdam’s well-known attractions are a major pull factor, leading to complaints of overcrowding in the Dutch capital.One of the world’s most notorious human traffickers attended a meeting in Sicily with Italian intelligence officials to discuss controls on migrant flows from Libya.

Abd al-Rahman Milad, known as Bija, took part in a meeting with Italian officials and a delegation from the Libyan coastguard at Cara di Mineo, in Catania, one of the biggest migrant reception centres in Europe, on 11 May 2017.

Bija’s presence was documented by the Italian newspaper Avvenire, which on Friday published an extensive investigation into the meeting.

A UN security report published in June 2017 described Bija as a bloodthirsty human trafficker responsible for shootings at sea and suspected of drowning dozens of people. He is considered to be the leader of a criminal organisation operating in the Zawyah area in north-west Libya, about 28 miles west of Tripoli.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Abd al-Rahman al-Milad. Photograph: Avvenire

In February 2017, the then Italian interior minister, Marco Minniti, signed a memorandum with the leader of Libya’s UN-recognised government, Fayez al-Sarraj, introducing a new level of cooperation between the Libyan coastguard and the Italians, including the provision of four patrol vessels.

The controversial deal has empowered the Libyan coastguard to intercept migrant dinghies at sea and bring them back to Libya, where aid agencies say the migrants and refugees suffer torture and abuse. The deal, which entailed Italy providing funds and equipment, was made by Minniti, a former communist with deep connections to Italian intelligence and the levers of the Italian state, in an attempt to stem the flow of migrants to its shores.

The agreement was recently reinforced by Italy’s interior minister, Luciana Lamorgese, at a meeting in Malta with his counterparts from France, Germany and Malta.

According to Avvenire, which obtained the photos from a source present at the meeting, Bija obtained a pass to enter Italy and take part in the meeting, which was also attended by north African delegates from a handful of international humanitarian agencies. Bija was presented at the meeting as “a commander of the Libyan coastguard”.

Bija had already been recognised by a number of migrants in Cara di Mineo on the day of the meeting.

According to the Italian newspaper’s source, Bija that day asked the Italian authorities for funds to manage the reception of migrants in Libya.

“There had always been suspicions about the agreement between the Libyan coastguard and the Italian government,” Nello Scavo, who wrote the Avvenire story, told the Guardian. “In the past, there had already been talk of the suspected involvement of traffickers in the Libyan coastguard. But now we have the evidence. It seems really strange that Italian intelligence was not aware of Bija’s identity. It is difficult to believe they were distracted.”

Last September, detectives in Sicily arrested three men who allegedly raped and tortured dozens of migrants in a detention centre in the north-west of Libya.

Prosecutors in Agrigento have collected testimonies from numerous asylum seekers from north Africa, who allegedly recognised their former captors at a migrant registration centre in Messina, Sicily.

The three alleged captors, a 27-year-old Guinean man and two Egyptians, 24 and 26, are accused of torture, kidnapping and human trafficking, operated in Zawiya detention centre, the same centre where Bija operated.

In some of the migrants’ testimonies, contained in the survey documents seen by the Guardian, asylum seekers talk about a man who called himself “Abdou Rahman, who was in charge of transferring migrants to the beach. It was he who, in the end, decided who could embark or not. He was a violent man and armed. We all feared him.”

Friday’s development came as the Italian foreign minister, Luigi Di Maio, presented a new decree regarding asylum seekers, which he said would cut the time it took for a decision on whether a migrant should be repatriated to four months.

Facebook has quietly rescinded a policy banning false claims in advertising, creating a specific exemption that leaves political adverts unconstrained regarding how they could mislead or deceive, as a potential general election looms in the UK.

The social network had previously banned adverts containing “deceptive, false or misleading content”, a much stronger restriction than its general rules around Facebook posts. But, as reported by the journalist Judd Legum, in the last week the rules have narrowed considerably, only banning adverts that “include claims debunked by third-party fact-checkers, or, in certain circumstances, claims debunked by organisations with particular expertise”.

Should Trump be banned from Twitter? Read more

Under Facebook’s third-party fact-checking programme, it invites independent organisations such as the UK’s Full Fact to verify claims posted to the social network. But the groups, made up mainly of small charities and nonprofits, are heavily constrained in how many claims they can fact-check, meaning they often only verify the most viral cases.

But even that limit has been lifted for some political adverts. A separate policy introduced by the social network recently declared opinion pieces and satire ineligible for verification, including any website or page “with the primary purpose of expressing the opinion or agenda of a political figure”. The end result is that any direct statement from a candidate or campaign cannot be fact-checked and so is automatically exempted from policies designed to prevent misinformation. (After the publication of this story, Facebook clarified that only politicians currently in office or running for office, and political parties, are exempt: other political adverts still need to be true.)

The changes, Legum reported, followed a run of Donald Trump adverts that contained false claims but were not removed under the old rules.

The new rules could prompt a clash between Facebook and UK regulators. The Advertising Standards Authority does not cover political adverts in Britain, the content of which is largely unregulated, but it does cover all other adverts, including those posted on Facebook. The ASA’s code explicitly bans adverts that “materially mislead or [are] likely to do so”, language that is close to that used in Facebook’s previous policies.

A Facebook spokesman said: “We don’t believe that it’s an appropriate role for us to referee political debates. Nor do we think it would be appropriate to prevent a politician’s speech from reaching its audience and being subject to public debate and scrutiny.”

Facebook’s decision comes as the rival service TikTok takes the opposite stance. In a blogpost, the social network, whose reported 500 million users would make it the largest in the world not owned by Facebook, made clear it would not be hosting any political adverts.

Q&A What is TikTok? Show Hide TikTok is a video-sharing app which has become phenomenally popular with teenagers. Users film themselves in 15-second clips, typically set to music, and upload them to be viewed by followers and strangers alike. It has been the No 1 app on the worldwide App Store for five consecutive quarters, with an estimated 500 million users worldwide. Owned by Chinese startup ByteDance, the app as it is today is a merger of the original TikTok, which was launched internationally in September 2017, and the viral sensation Musical.ly. The latter had already become one of the most popular social media platforms for UK and US teenagers by the time it was purchased by ByteDance in November 2017. The merger meant TikTok ended up on the smartphones of more than 60 million users overnight. Bytedance has a valuation of $75bn (£60bn), based primarily on the extraordinary growth of TikTok and its Chinese equivalent, Douyin. Lil Nas X found fame overnight when his track Old Town Road was used extensively on 15-second clips on the social network. That enthusiasm took the artist to a record-breaking run at the top of the US Billboard Hot 100 chart. However, Bytedance was fined a record $5.7m in the US for illegally collecting personal information from children under 13, and has been under investigation in the UK for how it handles the personal data of its young users, and whether it prioritises the safety of children on its social network. Alex Hern, UK technology editor

“Any paid ads that come into the community need to fit the standards for our platform, and the nature of paid political ads is not something we believe fits the TikTok platform experience,” wrote Blake Chandlee, the company’s vice-president of global business solutions. “To that end, we will not allow paid ads that promote or oppose a candidate, current leader, political party or group, or issue at the federal, state, or local level – including election-related ads, advocacy ads, or issue ads.”

Chandlee said the decision was prompted by TikTok’s mission “to inspire creativity and build joy”. That same rationale had been cited by the company, which is owned by the Chinese startup Bytedance, to explain why it censored posts that went against the political orthodoxy of Beijing, mentioning topics such as the Tiananmen Square killings or the independence movement in Taiwan.

When the Guardian revealed the censorship, TikTok said the rules had since been repealed and replaced with ones that “take localised approaches” to “provide an app experience that fosters their creativity”.Police are investigating the death of a baby in Britain’s largest female prison after an inmate gave birth alone in her cell at night.

The Guardian understands that the woman, who had been at an advanced stage of pregnancy, gave birth alone in her cell in the early hours of Friday last week. A source with knowledge of the events said that when prison staff visited the woman’s cell on Friday morning the baby was unresponsive.

Vicky Robinson, the director at HMP Bronzefield, confirmed that a baby died at the prison last Friday and said it was supporting the mother.

South East Coast Ambulance Service confirmed it had received a call from the prison at 8.30am last Friday and that one ambulance attended the prison. Police were called shortly afterwards.

Surrey police said in a statement: “The death is currently being treated as unexplained and an investigation is continuing to establish the full circumstances of what happened.”

The case raises serious questions about how the woman came to be unsupervised and without medical support during her labour and birth, and about the conditions at the privately run prison.

A spokesman for the Prisons & Probation Ombudsman, an independent body which investigates deaths in prisons and detention centres, confirmed that they are not investigating the baby’s death and said it was not part of their remit.

Robinson said: “We are supporting the mother through this distressing time and our thoughts are with her, her family and our staff involved. We are undertaking a full review and working with all relevant authorities during their investigations. It would not be appropriate to comment any further.”

Bronzefield is Europe’s largest female prison, holding up to 557 inmates, and is operated by Sodexo Justice Services. Concerns have been raised previously about the care of prisoners.

In the case of Natasha Chin, who died at HMP Bronzefield in 2016, an inquest jury found that neglect and systemic failings at the prison had contributed to her death. Four women have died at Bronzefield since July 2016.

There is a mother and baby unit at the prison and women whose babies are born in prison, or who already have a baby when they enter prison, can keep the infants with them until they are 18 months old.

Every year, about 600 pregnant women are held in prisons in England and Wales, and about 100 babies are born there.

According to the Prison Reform Trust, women made up 5% of the prison population in 2018 with 7,745 women incarcerated. The majority of them, 82%, were sentenced for non-violent offences.

Naomi Delap, the director of the charity Birth Companions, which supports pregnant women and new mothers in prison, said: “We are deeply saddened by the report of this incident in prison custody. Our thoughts are with the mother and all those affected by this tragic event. While the circumstances are still unclear and subject to ongoing investigation, this is a powerful reminder of the need for us to all ensure that pregnant and postnatal women have access to high-quality physical and mental healthcare in custody.”

Jane Ryan, a solicitor at Bhatt Murphy Solicitors who specialises in cases of women in prison, said: “There are serious concerns raised about risk issues arising from lack of access to midwives when labour commences, access to pregnancy records and full maternity care. It is an indictment of our prison system that a woman was giving birth in a prison cell. There must be a full independent investigation, and possibly an inquest, into these horrific circumstances.”

Dr Kate Paradine, the chief executive of the charity Women in Prison, said: “All mothers should have the right to give birth in dignity. But time and time again, we hear of situations where this isn’t happening, with mothers regularly being denied access to the vital health and maternity care necessary to give birth safely. This has devastating consequences not only for the baby and mother, but also for the rest of the family they are separated from.”

Deborah Coles, director of the charity INQUEST called for an independent inquiry into the baby’s death. “This is horrifying and exposes the utter inhumanity of a prison system where a woman can give birth alone in a cell and the baby dies.. The death of a baby behind bars warrants an independent inquiry. The fact that the PPO is not investigating makes this even more essential.”A French man paralysed in a nightclub accident has walked again thanks to a brain-controlled exoskeleton, providing hope to tetraplegics seeking to regain movement.

The patient trained for months, harnessing his brain signals to control a computer-simulated avatar to perform basic movements before using the robot device to walk. Scientists described the trial results as a breakthrough.

Exoskeleton suits: can 'superhuman' frames cross into the mainstream? Read more

Doctors who conducted the trial said though the device was years away from being publicly available, it had the potential to improve patients’ quality of life and autonomy.

The patient, identified only as Thibault, 28, from Lyon, said the technology had given him a new lease of life. Four years ago his life was permanently changed when he fell 40ft (12 metres) from a balcony, severing his spinal cord and leaving him paralysed from the shoulders down.

“When you are in my position, when you can’t do anything with your body … I wanted to do something with my brain,” Thibault said.

He trained using a video game avatar system to acquire the skills needed to operate the exoskeleton and had to relearn natural movements from scratch. “I can’t go home tomorrow in my exoskeleton but I’ve got to a point where I can walk. I walk when I want and I stop when I want,” Thibault said.

Cervical spinal cord injuries leave about 20% of patients paralysed in all four limbs and is the most severe injury of its kind.

Alim Louis Benabid, professor emeritus at Grenoble and lead author of the study published in the Lancet Neurology journal, said: “The brain is still capable of generating commands that would normally move the arms and legs, there’s just nothing to carry them out.”

A team of experts from Grenoble Alpes hospital, the biomedical company Cinatech and the CEA research centre began the procedure by implanting two recording devices either side of Thibault’s head, between the brain and the skin. These read his sensorimotor cortex, which controls motor function.

Each decoder transmits brain signals, which are translated by an algorithm into the movements the patient has thought about. It is this system that sends the physical commands the exoskeleton executes.

Thibault used the avatar and video game to think about performing physical tasks such as walking and reaching out to touch objects. Using the avatar, video game and exoskeleton combined, he was able to cover the length of one and a half football pitches over the course of many sessions.

Several studies have used implants to stimulate patients’ muscles but the Grenoble research is the first to use brain signals to control a robot exoskeleton.

Experts involved in the study said it could potentially lead to brain-controlled wheelchairs for paralysed patients. “This isn’t about turning man into machine but about responding to a medical problem,” said Benabid. “We’re talking about ‘repaired man’, not ‘augmented man’.”

In a comment piece on the study, Tom Shakespeare, professor of disability research at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, said the exoskeleton system was a long way from usable clinical possibility.

But Thibault said the trial offered a “message of hope to people like me … This is possible, even with our handicap.”Mr. Volker, a former ambassador to NATO who served unpaid and part-time as Ukraine special envoy before abruptly resigning last week, was not a hostile witness who went into the testimony intending to make accusations against the president. Instead, he told investigators that he was devoted to helping Ukraine resolve its grinding five-year-old conflict with Russian-armed separatists and tried to satisfy the president’s suspicions about Ukraine but was never fully kept in the loop.

Nonetheless, his account, as related by a person familiar with his testimony and the documents released by the committee, raises significant questions for the president as well as Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and others.

Mr. Volker told the House investigators that he was eager to help the newly elected Mr. Zelensky build a relationship with Mr. Trump that would bolster Ukraine but found last May that Mr. Giuliani’s efforts were convincing the president that Ukraine was full of “terrible people” who “tried to take me down” in 2016.

The new Ukrainian government sought Mr. Volker’s help in managing Mr. Giuliani. In July, Mr. Yermak asked Mr. Volker to connect him with the former New York mayor, which Mr. Volker agreed to do. Mr. Volker met with Mr. Giuliani for breakfast on July 19 and, he told the committee investigators, warned the former mayor that his theory about corruption involving Mr. Biden was unfounded and implausible and that his sources about it were not credible.

The Ukrainians were wary of being dragged into American domestic politics. “President Zelenskyy is sensitive about Ukraine being taken seriously, not merely as an instrument in Washington domestic, reelection politics,” William B. Taylor, the top American diplomat in Kiev, wrote in a text message a couple days after the breakfast.

Mr. Giuliani talked with Mr. Yermak the next day and then advocated a phone call between the two presidents. At the same time Mr. Trump had ordered his aides to hold up the $391 million in congressionally approved aid to Ukraine, with no explanation provided to the agencies involved. Then he got on the phone with Mr. Zelensky to ask for “a favor.”

A week after the phone call, on Aug. 2, Mr. Giuliani met in Madrid with Mr. Yermak and then said the Ukrainian president should issue a statement committing to fighting corruption. A week later, Mr. Volker talked with Mr. Yermak and then reached out to Mr. Giuliani.SAN FRANCISCO — Iranian hackers targeted hundreds of email accounts associated with at least one presidential campaign, as well as those of American journalists and current and former United States government officials, according to Microsoft.

In a report released on Friday, Microsoft said the hackers, with apparent backing from Iran’s government, made more than 2,700 attempts to identify the email accounts of current and former government officials, journalists covering political campaigns and accounts associated with one major presidential campaign.

Microsoft would not name the campaign.

The revelation comes as the Trump administration is weighing a possible cyberstrike against Iran, to punish Tehran for what White House officials charge was an Iranian attack on Saudi oil facilities last month.

The report is also an indication that cyberattacks may play a major role in the 2020 presidential campaign, as they did four years ago.“We are particularly concerned that many students are participating” in violent protests, “jeopardizing their safety and even their future,” she said. “As a responsible government, we have a duty to use all available means to stop the escalating violence and restore calmness in society.”

The ban on face masks will be punishable by up to one year in jail and a fine. It will apply to public gatherings of more than few dozen people. But enforcing the ban could prove difficult given their near ubiquity in the movement. Face masks are a common feature among the crowds of protesters, both for security and safety.

Many protesters wear gas masks and respirators, as do first aid responders and journalists, to protect themselves from tear gas that the police deploy to disperse crowds that engage in violence. Some wear them to protect their identity, fearful they will be captured in photos and by surveillance equipment, then targeted for retaliation.

Few people attend mass gatherings without one, even during peaceful marches and demonstrations. When Mrs. Lam held her first town hall with residents last week, many members of the audience who confronted her with difficult questions wore masks.

But the face masks, and the anonymity they provide, have given cover to more violent protesters, who have beaten police officers and vandalized property. Undercover police officers have also used masks to disguise themselves as protesters and make arrests.

As word of the ban spread on Friday during lunchtime, hundreds of people, many wearing face masks, blocked a major road in downtown Hong Kong. They chanted antigovernment slogans, saying it was “unreasonable legislation” and “covering faces is not a crime.” Some called for Mrs. Lam to change course and disband the police.In the past three months, Mr. Buttigieg and Mr. Biden saw their fund-raising dip from the previous quarter, but Ms. Warren’s continued to grow. Her $24.6 million total surpassed the $19.2 million she raised in the second quarter, which dwarfed the $6 million she collected in the first three months of the year.

Presidential candidates must report their fund-raising for the third quarter, which covered July through September, to the Federal Election Commission by Oct. 15.

Beating Mr. Sanders’s total for the past three months would have given another jolt of momentum to Ms. Warren’s campaign. Instead, Mr. Sanders’s status as the top fund-raiser for the quarter provides a reminder of his sizable following, even as other indicators like polling are less favorable.

In the long run, Mr. Sanders’s slight financial edge over Ms. Warren in the quarter is unlikely to make a major difference in the perceptions of their candidacies. Mr. Sanders entered the race having already established an enormous network of donors during his 2016 presidential campaign, and he raised slightly less in the third quarter of 2019 than he did during the same time period in 2015.

Ms. Warren’s fund-raising in the quarter was a fraction of what President Trump and the Republican National Committee brought in, though those numbers are not directly comparable. Mr. Trump’s re-election campaign and the R.N.C. raised a combined $125 million in the past three months, officials said this week.

Ms. Warren struggled with fund-raising at the beginning of her presidential campaign, but those struggles ended up being short-lived. Her third-quarter haul is another validation of her strategy to rely on online donors to finance her campaign.

That choice is central to her bid for the presidency, freeing up her schedule and creating a tidy contrast with some of her rivals: While other candidates gather with rich donors, Ms. Warren spends hours taking pictures with voters who wait in the “selfie line” at her town hall events.In the fall of 2006, Chicago held an auction to sell taxi medallions, the permits that let people own and operate cabs. Hundreds of bids poured in, including some offering to pay much more than expected. The city raised millions of dollars. Officials declared the sale a success.

But there was something strange about the auction: None of the winning bidders lived in Chicago.

Almost all of them lived hundreds of miles away, in New York.

Over the next decade, New York taxi industry leaders — fleet owners, brokers and financiers — steadily seized control of Chicago’s medallion market and squeezed it for huge profits. Using tactics honed in New York, they made millions of dollars, but they ultimately helped to leave the industry in tatters and the lives of immigrant drivers on the edge of ruin.

New Yorkers used a similar playbook in several cities across the United States: They inflated medallion prices, provided high-risk loans to buyers and collected interest and fees before the bubbles burst and the markets collapsed. Medallion prices rose sevenfold in some places, soaring to $700,000 in Boston, $550,000 in Philadelphia, $400,000 in Miami and $250,000 in San Francisco .Diahann Carroll , who more than half a century ago transcended racial barriers as the star of “Julia,” the first American television series to chronicle the life of a black professional woman, died on Friday at her home in West Hollywood, Calif. She was 84.

Her publicist, Jeffrey Lane, said the cause was complications of breast cancer. Ms. Carroll had survived the cancer in the 1990s and become a public advocate for screening and treatment.

A situation comedy broadcast on NBC from 1968 to 1971, “Julia” starred Ms. Carroll as Julia Baker, a widowed nurse with a young son. The show featured Marc Copage as Julia’s son, and Lloyd Nolan as the curmudgeonly but broad-minded doctor for whom she worked. (“Have you always been a Negro or are you just trying to be fashionable?” he asks Julia in an audacious, widely quoted line from the first episode.)Image caption Top US diplomats Bill Taylor and Gordon Sondland's text messages were released on Thursday

Texts show how US officials worked to prod the Ukrainian president into opening a public inquiry into President Trump's leading opponent, Joe Biden.

The messages, released by congressional Democrats, emerge as Mr Trump faces an impeachment inquiry over the matter.

The exchanges show a senior diplomat saying it would be "crazy" to withhold military aid to Ukraine for Mr Trump's political gain in the 2020 election.

US law bans soliciting foreign help for electoral purposes.

But Mr Trump denies any wrongdoing and, on Friday, said there was "no quid pro quo" in the communications.

His remarks came a day after he publicly called on Ukraine and China to investigate Mr Biden, a top Democratic White House candidate, and his son, Hunter.

The Republican president accuses his political opponents of a "witch hunt".

Impeachment in the Democratic-controlled House of Representatives would trigger a trial in the Senate.

Senators would have to vote to convict Mr Trump by a two-thirds majority to remove him from office.

But that outcome is seen as unlikely given that the president's fellow Republicans control the upper chamber.

What do the texts say?

The impeachment inquiry stems from a 25 July call in which Mr Trump asked President Volodymyr Zelensky to investigate his rival.

The wide-ranging text message discussions are connected to allegations by the Democrats that Mr Trump dangled military aid as a way to press Ukraine to dig dirt on Mr Biden.

Sent between July and September, they involve high-ranking officials:

Kurt Volker, Mr Trump's Ukraine envoy who resigned a week ago

Gordon Sondland, the US ambassador to the European Union, and a significant donor to Mr Trump

Bill Taylor, a top US diplomat at the American embassy in Ukraine

On 19 July, the three diplomats discussed arranging a phone call between Mr Zelensky and Mr Trump.

Mr Volker told the other two he had had breakfast with Mr Trump's lawyer, Rudy Giuliani that morning - and identified the main purpose of the upcoming phone call.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption Mr Giuliani is alleged to have sought to dig up dirt on Democrat candidate Joe Biden

"Most impt [important] is for Zelensky to say that he will help the investigation," he told the others.

But Bill Taylor, the senior US diplomat in Ukraine, warned that President Zelensky "is sensitive" about Ukraine being seen "as an instrument in Washington domestic, re-election politics".

Ahead of the call, Mr Volker texted that he had heard from the White House that Mr Zelensky would be offered a formal visit to Washington "assuming President Z convinces Trump he will investigate / 'get to the bottom of what happened in 2016'".

This is a reference to unfounded allegations that Ukraine interfered in the 2016 US presidential election and worked to help the Democrats.

In the call, Mr Trump asked Mr Zelensky to investigate Joe Biden.

But text messages show US officials discussed what the Ukrainian president should say in a statement afterwards.

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Mr Zelensky was reportedly "sensitive" about being seen as a US "instrument"

By 13 August, Kurt Volker advised that Mr Zelensky's statement should address interference in US politics, "especially with the alleged involvement of some Ukrainian politicians" - and Burisma, the company Joe Biden's son was involved in.

There has been no evidence of wrongdoing by Hunter Biden.

Then, on 29 August, the tone of discussions changed. Mr Zelenksy's aide Andriy Yermak sent a curt message to Mr Volker, including a link to a Politico story headlined "Trump holds up Ukraine military aid meant to confront Russia".

Mr Taylor, the senior diplomat in Ukraine, seemed to voice his concerns about the motives for the delay.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption What we know about Biden-Ukraine corruption claims

"I think it's crazy to withhold security assistance for help with a political campaign," he said.

That suggestion, however, was firmly pushed back by Ambassador Gordon Sondland, who said Mr Taylor was misunderstanding the president's intentions.

What are Democrats and Republicans saying?

In a letter alongside the release of the texts, the Democratic chairmen of three committees investigating Mr Trump criticised his "now open defiance of our core values as American citizens".

"The President and his aides are engaging in a campaign of misinformation and misdirection in an attempt to normalise the act of soliciting foreign powers to interfere in our elections," wrote Congressmen Eliot Engel, Adam Schiff and Elijah Cummings.

"This is not normal or acceptable. It is unethical, unpatriotic, and wrong."

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption Trump calls for China and Ukraine to investigate the Bidens

But Republican Jim Jordan said Mr Volker's testimony on Thursday had "undercut the salacious narrative that Representative Adam Schiff is using to sell his impeachment ambitions".

The House Oversight Committee - of which Mr Jordan is the ranking Republican member - tweeted that "this information [contained in the text messages] cannot possibly be understood without Volker's explanations from yesterday's testimony".

He has called for the entire transcript of the testimony to be released.

Mr Trump and his defenders have insisted there was no quid-pro-quo in his dealings with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky. Text messages between members of the US team involved in Ukrainian diplomacy, however, suggest a different story.

It was very clear to them what Mr Trump wanted: a publicly announced Ukrainian investigation of political rival Joe Biden and the 2016 election hacking.

It also was very clear what they had to offer the Ukrainians: not only US military aid, which had been put on hold by the White House, but also a meeting between the two presidents in Washington that would have be extremely valuable in bolstering the legitimacy of the newly elected Ukrainian leader.

Drawing a straight line between the offer and the ask doesn't take much imagination.

It may not be long before the White House falls back to its final line of defence - that threatening and cajoling Ukraine to investigate Mr Biden was justified by the egregiousness of Mr Biden's alleged corruption.

With Mr Trump backed into a corner, it's a recipe for all-out political warfare.

Four quick questions on Trump-Ukraine

Why is Mr Trump being investigated?

A whistleblower alleges he used "the power of his office to solicit interference from a foreign country in the US 2020 election", by asking Ukraine to investigate his main rival, Joe Biden.

Is this illegal?

If this is what he's proven to have done, then yes: it's illegal to ask foreign entities for help winning a US election. Mr Trump says it's a witch-hunt and he did nothing wrong.

What could happen next?

If the Democrat-controlled House of Representatives voted to impeach Mr Trump, there'd be a trial in the Senate.

Could he be removed?

A Senate vote needs a two-thirds majority to convict, but Mr Trump's Republican party controls the Senate so that's unlikely. And the Mueller inquiry made clear you can't charge a sitting president with a crime.Image copyright EPA Image caption Police were mourning their colleagues in the French capital on Friday

Anti-terror investigators have taken over the inquiry into the killing of four police employees by a colleague in Paris on Thursday.

A 45-year-old IT specialist killed three police officers and an administrative worker in a knife rampage at Paris police headquarters.

A motive is unclear, with a police union initially suggesting a workplace dispute was to blame.

But investigators say new information justifies a terror probe.

The attacker, Mickaël Harpon, was shot dead by a junior police officer after he attacked colleagues in several offices at the central police building in Paris.

He converted to Islam 18 months ago, according to reports, and had recently stopped talking to female colleagues in the office. But a government spokeswoman said on Friday morning that there was no indication he had been radicalised before the attack.

What do we know about the motive?

Police investigators initially said there was no indication the attack was an act of terror but Paris police chief Didier Lallement later told reporters no theory was being ruled out.

Until now, the case had been handled by the city's public prosecutor.

This changed on Friday evening when an official from the prosecutor's office said that national anti-terror prosecutors had taken over the investigation "in the light of the evidence gathered by criminal investigators".

Details of the new information uncovered have not been revealed.

But according to Reuters, quoting judicial sources, the move came about after several people close to the attacker, including his wife, were interrogated and his mobile phone analysed.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption The scene of the attack was quickly cordoned off by police

Police earlier seized computer equipment during a search of Harpon's home in the north of the city, according to media reports.

The killer's wife on Friday reportedly told police that he had been incoherent and had heard voices the night before the attack.

The woman, who is being detained but has not been charged, told police her husband had had a disagreement with his bosses.

Police union officials also described tensions between Harpon and his supervisor.

Harpon, who was born in the French overseas territory of Martinique in the Caribbean, worked in the force's intelligence unit. He also had a hearing and a speech disability.

What happened?

The employee entered the building around lunchtime on Thursday, and proceeded to attack his colleagues with a kitchen knife.

He stabbed three people inside two offices and two women on a stairway, before he was shot dead by an officer inside the building's courtyard.

Three men and one woman were killed. A fifth person was seriously injured.

The police building is near major tourist sites including Notre-Dame cathedral.

Earlier on Friday, a minute's silence was held outside the headquarters in memory of the four staff who died.

Police shared a photo of the gathering on Twitter, calling it a "moment of contemplation" that was "deeply moving".

The police officer who shot dead the attacker had only been in his job for six days, according to Mr Lallement.Image copyright AFP/Getty Image caption Some demonstrators vandalised businesses, blocked roads and set fires while police fired tear gas

Thousands have taken part in unplanned protests in Hong Kong after the territory's government announced a face mask ban, which came into effect at midnight (16:00 GMT).

Chief executive Carrie Lam invoked a colonial-era emergency law in a bid to quell months of anti-government unrest.

The ban comes after an escalation of violence during protests on 1 October, when an officer shot a demonstrator.

Reports on Friday said a 14-year-old had been shot in the leg.

He is reportedly being treated at Tuen Mun hospital and is in a serious condition.

A police statement published by the South China Morning Post confirmed an officer "fired one shot as his life was under serious threat" after being attacked by a large group of protesters - although it does not say anyone was hit.

The demonstrations have now died down throughout most of the territory, although there are still pockets of unrest.

What happened on Friday?

Protests erupted immediately after the ban was announced.

Many left work early to join the spontaneous demonstrations. Some furious protesters blocked roads, torched Chinese flags and vandalised stations and businesses, as police fired rounds of tear gas.

The territory's Mass Transit Railway (MTR) announced a full service suspension of all trains, which will continue on Saturday morning until an assessment can be carried out.

A spokesman told the BBC this was due to vandalism and attacks on staff.

Mask-wearing activists had also earlier called on others to wear masks in defiance of the government, which critics fear is becoming increasingly authoritarian.

Ms Lam said she was forced to implement the colonial-era law because violence at the now-weekly protests was "destroying the city", and she could not allow the situation "to get worse and worse".

The end of anonymity

Danny Vincent, BBC News, Hong Kong

Angry protesters chanted as they marched through the heart of this financial hub. They ripped down a banner marking 70 years of communist rule, setting it alight in front of a cheering crowd.

Hundreds wore masks in defiance of the ban.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption Watch the moment protesters burn a banner after Hong Kong's face mask ban

Today will be the last time demonstrators can hide their faces legally. Anonymity has become a key part of this movement but many fear that the introduction of this emergency law could lead to further restrictions.

This protest movement began in opposition to an extradition bill now withdrawn from the legislature. The use of the emergency law did not need to go through the legislative body.

Carrie Lam insists that the territory is not in a state of emergency, but the law allows her to take further emergency measures.

What's been the reaction to the ban?

Observers say the regulation will be hard to enforce and hugely controversial: critics have warned the mask ban could be the first in a series of "draconian" measures.

"This is a watershed. This is a Rubicon," pro-democracy lawmaker Claudia Mo told news agency AFP. "And I'm worried this could be just a starter. More draconian bans in the name of law could be lurking around the corner."

The announcement has also prompted reaction from further afield, with Marta Hurtado, the United Nations human rights spokeswoman, noting at a news conference in Geneva that "any restriction must have a basis in law and be proportionate and as least intrusive as possible".

UK Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab, meanwhile, has said "political dialogue is the only way to resolve the situation".

Where does the ban apply?

The ban will apply for approved and unapproved public assemblies - rallies and marches - as well as in unlawful assemblies and riots.

The ban covers all kinds of facial covering, including face paint. Protesters have increasingly worn masks for a number of reasons, including to conceal their identities - from employers, parents and, in some cases, police - and to protect themselves from tear gas.

Image copyright EPA Image caption The ban targets all manner of facial coverings

There are exemptions for people wearing masks for health reasons, or if required by their profession.

Ms Lam said "violence had been escalating to alarming levels" leading to a situation of "chaos and panic" in the city.

What is the Emergency Regulations Ordinance?

The legislation invoked by Ms Lam, called the Emergency Regulations Ordinance, dates to 1922 and has not been used in more than 50 years.

It enables the chief executive to bypass the normal legislative process, where bills have to go through the city's parliament, the Legislative Council.

Image copyright AFP Image caption Protesters have often worn face masks to hide their identity

The ERO was last used in 1967 to help stop riots in the territory's trading hub.

Ms Lam stressed the new regulation did not mean that Hong Kong was in a state of emergency. But she said the city was "in a state of serious public danger".

What is the background?

Hong Kong's protests started in June, sparked by proposals to extradite suspected criminals to mainland China.

The extradition bill has since been cancelled but protests have widened into pro-democracy and anti-police demonstrations.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption How Hong Kong got trapped in a cycle of violence

Over the months, clashes between police and activists have become increasingly violent. On Tuesday, police shot a protester in the chest with a live bullet for the first time.

Authorities say the 18-year-old - who was attacking police and was arrested after being shot - is in a stable condition in hospital.

Hong Kong is a former British colony handed back to China in 1997.

It has a "one country, two systems" agreement that guarantees it some autonomy, and its people certain freedoms, including freedom of assembly and freedom of speech.

But those freedoms - the Basic Law - expire in 2047 and it is not clear what Hong Kong's status will then be.Video

In early 2019, up to a million fish died in Australia's Darling River after drought and extreme weather.

Authorities are now painstakingly trying to relocate as many fish as they can, as another summer approaches.

Video edited by Frances Mao.Image copyright Getty Images

The US unemployment rate has fallen to a 50-year low, possibly easing recession worries after recent weak economic data.

The Labor Department figures showed that the rate fell to 3.5% in September from 3.7%, with the economy adding 136,000 jobs last month.

In addition, August data was revised up to 168,000 jobs created instead of the previously reported 130,000.

However, wage growth was unchanged and manufacturing jobs fell in September.

The report came on the heels of a string of weak economic reports, including a plunge in manufacturing activity to more than a 10-year low in September and a sharp slowdown in services industry growth to levels last seen in 2016.

There are fears that the Trump administration's 15-month trade war with China is spilling over to the rest of the US economy, which has been one of the few bright spots in a world where many other countries are experiencing marked slowdown.

The US-China trade dispute has eroded business confidence, hitting investment and manufacturing.

Despite the continued moderate employment growth and sharp drop in the jobless rate, many economists still expect the Federal Reserve to cut interest rates at least one more time this year.

Image copyright EPA Image caption The positive jobs data is unlikely to ease pressure on Federal Reserve chief Jerome Powell to cut interest rates

The US central bank cut rates in July for the first time since 2008 and cut them again last month. It is trying to keep the longest economic expansion in US history, now in its 11th year, on track.

September's job gains were below the monthly average of 161,000 this year, but still above the roughly 100,000 needed each month to keep up with growth in the working-age population, according to economists.

Manufacturing shed 2,000 jobs last month, the first decline since March, after hiring 2,000 workers in August. The sector is seen as having borne the brunt of the trade wars.

This week, Washington announced tariffs on aircraft, other industrial products and agricultural products from the European Union as part of a dispute over aircraft subsidies given to Boeing's rival Airbus.

What's been worrying the markets?

Shares were hit earlier this week by some disappointing economic surveys.

While the manufacturing sector has been the weak point of the US economy, the services sector had been performing more strongly.

"You've had this dichotomy, manufacturing extremely weak, service sector holding up and looking fairly resilient," said Neil Shearing, group chief economist at Capital Economics.

However, he said that on Wednesday, the non-manufacturing purchasing managers' index - which tests the mood of businesses - showed its slowest rate of growth for three years.

"The key question has been, OK, manufacturing's weak but so long as the service sector holds up and continues to be resilient, the US economy can avoid recession," Mr Shearing said.

Jim Reid, a strategist at Deutsche Bank in London, said that the US has been the "bright spot in a pretty moribund" western world, growing at about 2% to 2.5% a year, while Europe slips towards 0.5% or even 0% growth.

It is just a US problem?

Mr Shearing said that the manufacturing sector is weak globally.

"The essence of the issue is that since May this year, the manufacturing data both in the US and globally has been pretty horrific," he said.

But economies are less reliant on manufacturing than in the past. In the US, for instance, it makes up about 12% of the economy.

"We tend to think of the economy being about making things, but actually in the modern era it's more about services - health, retail, leisure," he said.

Image copyright Getty Images

Why does the American economy matter?

The US is still the world's biggest economy - despite the growth of China - and if it slows down the rest of the world can be expected to do so too. It is almost impossible to have a US recession without the rest of world suffering too.

Mr Shearing said it is not just about its size. "It's the consumer of last resort," he said, describing the US trade deficit which President Donald Trump has complained about.

"What the trade deficit is telling you is that the US consumes more than it produces," he said. "If it slows, there's repercussions".

What does it mean for US interest rates?

Federal Reserve chairman Jay Powell has been under pressure from President Trump to cut rates.

Last month, the Fed cut rates for the second time this year, lowering its key target rate by 25 basis points to between 1.75% and 2%. The markets are expecting another cut before the end of the year.Image copyright AFP Image caption Ukrainian troops: Frontline positions have been generally static for more than a year

Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelensky plans to pull Ukrainian troops back all along the front line in the east, if Russian-backed rebels reciprocate.

The announcement came from his foreign minister, Vadym Prystaiko, on Ukrainian TV. Such a pull-back has already happened in one frontline village.

He also said he was hoping for another major prisoner swap with Russia, "literally next week".

Mr Zelensky came to power promising to end the five-year conflict in the east.

Large parts of the Donbas region were seized by the Russian-backed separatists in April 2014, after Russia captured and annexed Ukraine's Crimea region.

Sporadic exchanges of fire - mainly mortars and machine-gun bursts - continue along the 400km (249-mile) front line.

The separatist rebels remain defiant, warning Mr Zelensky that he cannot dictate terms for areas that they control.

Commenting on the prisoner swap proposal, Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said "Russia would be glad to fulfil an 'all for all' exchange".

A landmark prisoner exchange took place on 7 September, raising hopes for a lasting thaw.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption Freed Ukrainians met their families in September after months of separation

Mr Zelensky announced earlier this week that Ukrainian troops would pull back from two more villages next week - Zolote and Petrivske.

"After that, he plans to disengage along the entire 400km, so that people stop dying along those 400km, and this will be phased," the foreign minister said.

France and Germany are the diplomatic guarantors working to restore peace. But no date has been set for a possible summit between Mr Zelensky and Russian President Vladimir Putin.

How could a peace deal take shape?

Negotiations are now focusing on a plan known as the "Steinmeier formula" to bring special status in the separatist-held east.

President Zelensky, elected in May, says he is prepared for fresh elections to be held in the rebel-held areas of Luhansk and Donetsk regions. But on Thursday night he set rigorous preconditions for them:

A full ceasefire

Withdrawal of all "foreign military units" from Donbas (the Donetsk-Luhansk conflict region)

Ukrainian border guards to be deployed on the Russia-Ukraine border

Russia and Ukraine to exchange all remaining prisoners

The rebels have Russian heavy weapons and, according to Western and Ukrainian intelligence, help from Russian regular forces. The Kremlin insists that only "Russian volunteers" are with the rebels.

Mr Zelensky says elections in Donbas, whenever they happen, must include candidates from Ukrainian political parties - not just pro-Russian ones; there must be international election monitors and Ukrainian election law must apply. They must not take place at gunpoint, he said.

Image copyright EPA Image caption Mr Zelensky promised the planned elections would not be held "under the barrel of a gun"

On Wednesday the rebel leaders in Donetsk and Luhansk - Denis Pushilin and Leonid Pasechnik - said any Ukrainian law on special status for the regions under their control would have to be agreed with them. They reject any rule from Kiev, calling their territories "republics".

They were defiant about Mr Zelensky's conditions for elections, in a statement quoted by the rebel dnr-news website.

"When he [Zelensky] says that elections in Donbas will take place only once Ukraine has control over the border he fails to understand that it's not for him, but for us, to decide when we have elections. The Kiev authority won't get any control over the border," they said.

The conflict has left 13,000 people dead and displaced about 1.5 million.

A win for Russia?

The BBC's Jonah Fisher in Kiev says it is hard to see how the proposed elections would be fairly contested, even if held under Ukrainian law. Most people with strongly pro-Ukrainian views left the occupied areas long ago, he points out.

Mr Zelensky's critics in Ukraine warn that such a deal with the rebels and their Russian backers could amount to a capitulation.

Ukraine's Segodnya news website says a military disengagement on the front line was discussed at a meeting of the Minsk "contact group" on Tuesday.

A ceasefire deal was reached in Minsk, the Belarus capital, in 2015, but it has been violated many times since then.Image copyright INBO/ANB Image caption Naya the wolf was last pictured in May and is presumed dead

Environmentalists are offering a €30,000 ($32,950; £26,789) reward for information about the presumed death of a wolf in Belgium.

Last year, the wolf - named Naya - became the first to be sighted in Belgium for a century.

But local nature agencies said neither she nor her cubs had been spotted since May, and suggested batteries on her tracking collar had worn down.

Several nature groups have blamed hunters for their disappearance.

The Nature and Forest Research Institute (INBO) declined to say how the wolf and her cubs had been killed as there was no trace of them. However, a spokesman said there was a dense network of cameras in that area of Flanders, so it was definite that Naya was dead.

Three private environmental groups - Bird Protection Flanders, Animal Rights and the Nature Aid Centre - initially offered €20,000 for information.

Bird Protection Flanders announced on Thursday that an unnamed Belgian businessman gave them €10,000 more towards the fund.

"Everything shows that the public no longer accepts that some people give themselves the right to decide which animals are allowed to live," the group wrote in a statement.

Speaking to local media, a Flemish hunters' association called the accusations "scandalous," and said it may file a defamation suit against two Belgian conservation groups.

Naya, originally born in east Germany, was first spotted in the northeast Belgium in January 2018. She was later joined by a male wolf, named August, who became her companion.

The INBO spokesman told the BBC that Naya last appeared on their camera network on 10 May. At the time, she was pregnant and close to giving birth.

August was also filmed bringing prey to their den for the cubs. But the institute said he stopped doing this two weeks later and was behaving like a solitary wolf again - another sign that Naya and her cubs were dead.

August is one of three wild wolves left in Belgium. The other two are in the French-speaking Wallonia region.

Wolves were hunted out of many European countries over a century ago but have gradually been migrating back across the continental mainland.

Their return has proved controversial, with farmers complaining about attacks on livestock.Image copyright Facebook/ Chris Bergan Image caption Christopher Bergan lived in Norway with Mr Dennis' daughter

A US man who shot dead his son-in-law as he jumped out of bushes to wish him happy birthday will face no charges for the "horrible accident," officials say.

Christopher Bergan, 37, had just flown from his native Norway to surprise Richard Dennis, 61, at his home in Gulf Breeze, Florida, on Tuesday night.

Mr Dennis fired one round, striking Mr Bergan in the chest in his backyard.

Mr Dennis had had an altercation earlier that night with a family member, police say.

"I'm not going to second guess Mr Dennis for what he did," Santa Rosa County Sheriff Bob Johnson told a news conference on Thursday.

"Here he is, he had just had a confrontation at the front of his house," said the lawman.

He said Mr Dennis had had an argument with a family member around 21:36 (01:36 GMT) on 1 October.

That relative had banged on Mr Dennis' front door in a manner similar to how Mr Bergan later did on the backdoor, the sheriff said.

Mr Bergan had arrived at 23:00 that night from Norway, where he lived with Mr Dennis' daughter.

He wanted to surprise his father-in-law for his 61st birthday.

Officials say he went straight to Mr Dennis' house after landing at the airport.

Mr Bergan banged on the backdoor, before jumping out of bushes "growling" as Mr Dennis turned the rear porch light on, the sheriff continued.

He said the backyard is enclosed by a fence.

"Our investigation has revealed that this was totally accidental," said Sheriff Johnson.

"It was a really sad occurrence and no charges are warranted in this case."

"You can't really say anything against Mr Dennis for doing what he did," he added.Image caption Alagba liked to eat the same food as humans, including plantain, rice and beans

A royal palace in Nigeria has announced that its resident tortoise has died following a short illness, saying it was a remarkable 344 years old.

The tortoise, named Alagba, meaning elderly one, lived in the palace of Ogbomoso in Oyo state.

BBC Yoruba's Abdulwasiu Hassan said Alagba had at least two personal attendants to see to her needs and would eat only twice a month.

She was thought to have healing powers and attracted visitors from far and wide.

The revered reptile was apparently brought to the palace by the kingdom's third leader, Isan Okumoyede, who reigned from 1770 to 1797.

However, Isan Okumoyede reigned just over 200 years ago. This means the tortoise would have already been 100 when she was found, for her to have reached the grand old age of 344.

And reptile experts have cast doubt on Alagba's alleged age.

Tim Skelton, curator of reptiles at Bristol Zoo, said it would be "impossible" for Alagba to have lived that long.

'Unlikely in the extreme'

"A hundred years is a very good age," said Mr Skelton. "Giant tortoises can live up to 200, but that's a very rare exception."

Alagba is not a giant tortoise. After looking at photos, Mr Skelton categorised Alagba as an African spur-thighed tortoise.

John Wilkinson, a professional herpetologist - an expert in reptiles - agreed.

"I would have thought that it would be unlikely in the extreme," he said. "They just don't live that long."

Image copyright GIANLUIGI GUERCIA Image caption Jonathan is believed to be the oldest animal on earth

The oldest tortoise - indeed animal - in the world is believed to be Jonathan, an 187-year-old giant tortoise who lives in St Helena.

"Any other tortoise lives between 70-80 years old, maximum 100," Mr Skelton said.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption Is this the oldest tortoise in the world?

So where did Algaba come from?

The story goes that she was brought to the palace by Isan Okumoyede, when he returned from a successful expedition over 200 years ago.

If this is true, Alagba will have lived through the reign of 18 Ogbomoso kings.

Image copyright Peace Sojay and his family Image caption People used to pray with the tortoise

Mr Wilkinson has a simple explanation: "I don't think there's much of a mystery here to be honest - there has been more than one tortoise."

"They loved it so much they went and bought another one."

And it seems as though this is not the end of Alagba's story. The current king said he plans to preserve her remains for tourism and historical records.Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption Iraqi anti-government protesters defy an open-ended curfew

Iraq's Prime Minister Adel Abdel Mahdi said he accepted the "rightful demands" of protesters as he called for calm after three days of unrest.

In a rare televised address, Mr Mahdi stuck a conciliatory tone as protesters demanded his resignation.

The PM said he would respond to their concerns, but warned there was no "magic solution" to Iraq's problems.

At least 20 people have died in the unrest as anger at unemployment and corruption boiled over.

A curfew has been imposed in Baghdad and several other cities in Iraq's southern provinces - but thousands defied it and security forces fired live rounds at them.

What did PM Mahdi say?

Calling on lawmakers to support him, Mr Mahdi promised to pass a new law granting poor families a basic income.

"I am reaffirming that your voice was heard before you even started protesting," Mr Mahdi said.

But he added that it would take time to bring about change.

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption PM Mahdi has until now preferred to communicate by written statement

The protests, which appear to lack any organised leadership, are the largest since Mr Mahdi became prime minister a year ago.

The UN and US have expressed concern at the violence and urged the Iraqi authorities to exercise restraint.

On Thursday, human rights group Amnesty International has called on the government in Baghdad to immediately rein in its security forces.

What happened on Thursday?

An indefinite curfew began in Baghdad at dawn applying to everyone except those travelling to and from the capital's airport. Ambulances and religious pilgrims were also excluded.

Security forces blocked major roads and bridges. Access to the internet was also limited, making it harder to organise protests on social media.

Image copyright Reuters Image caption Protesters took to the streets of Baghdad on Thursday despite the open-ended curfew

But thousands of protesters gathered in and around Tahrir Square - the focus of the recent unrest - prompting riot police to fire tear gas and shots in the air to disperse them.

"We'll keep going until the government falls," Ali, a 22-year-old unemployed university graduate, told AFP.

"I've got nothing but 250 lira ($0.20; £0.16) in my pocket while government officials have millions."

More from Iraq:

Violence has been concentrated in Baghdad and in the majority Shia Muslim areas of the south. Northern Kurdish regions and Sunni-majority areas in the west remain mostly calm.

On Thursday, police and hospital sources told Reuters that protesters had been killed in the capital, and also in and around the southern cities of Amara, Diwaniya, Hilla and Nassiriya, among others. Hundreds have been wounded.

Overnight on Wednesday, explosions were heard in Baghdad's heavily fortified Green Zone, where government offices and foreign embassies are located.

The US-led coalition fighting the Islamic State group in Iraq said none of its facilities were hit and that Iraqi security forces were investigating the blasts.

What triggered the unrest?

The protests appear to be the result of a spontaneous upwelling of frustration at Iraq's high youth unemployment rate, its dire public services and chronic corruption.

Simona Foltyn, a journalist based in Baghdad, told the BBC's World Update programme: "The demonstrators I have spoken to so far have said that these protests are a grassroots movement, comprised of a variety of people - men, women, graduates, the unemployed, the elderly - who are all airing grievances that have accumulated over the past years."

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption Protesters and security forces face off in Najaf

"They have all denied the involvement of any political party. They are, in fact, extremely disenfranchised and disappointed with the political establishment here."

She added: "All of the people who are protesting seem to be united in one thing: they want a better life. They want services, they want jobs, and they want living standards to go up."

Last year, the southern Iraqi city of Basra was rocked by weeks of protests over unsafe drinking water, power shortages, unemployment and corruption. Government offices, including the main provincial council building, were set alight.

What is the economic situation like in Iraq?

Iraq has the fourth-largest reserves of oil, but 22.5% of its population of 40 million were living on less than $1.90 (£1.53) a day in 2014, according to the World Bank. One in six households has experienced some form of food insecurity.

The unemployment rate was 7.9% last year, but among young people it was double that. And almost 17% of the economically active population is underemployed.

Unemployment in Iraq Modelled ILO estimates, %

The country is also struggling to recover after a brutal war against the Islamic State group, which seized control of large swathes of the north and west in 2014.

The Iraqi government and World Bank estimated last year that $88bn (£71bn) was needed to fund short- and medium-term reconstruction.

Just over one million people are still internally displaced, while 6.7 million are in need of humanitarian assistance, the UN says. Living conditions are dire in many conflict-affected areas, with insufficient basic services.BAGHDAD (Reuters) - Police snipers fired at demonstrators in Baghdad on Friday, as the death toll rose to 60 people in three days of violent national protests against government corruption.

A man is seen on the street during a curfew, three days after the nationwide anti-government protests turned violent, in Baghdad, Iraq October 4, 2019. REUTERS/Khalid al-Mousily

Prime Minister Adel Abdul Mahdi called for calm but protesters scorned his promises of political reform.

The country’s most influential cleric pinned the blame for the violence on politicians who had failed to improve the lives of the public, and ordered them to meet the protesters’ demands.

Another politically powerful cleric pulled his opposition faction’s lawmakers out of parliament, a gesture likely to fuel the passions behind the unrest.

On the streets of Baghdad, police appeared to be targetting individual protesters. Reuters reporters saw one fall to the ground after being shot in the head. He was pronounced dead in hospital.

Elsewhere, a Reuters television crew saw a man critically wounded by a gunshot to the neck after snipers on rooftops opened fire at a crowd.

The violence is the worst since Iraq put down an insurgency by Islamic State two years ago. The protests arose in the south, heartland of the Shi’ite majority, but quickly spread, with no formal leadership.

Security and medical sources gave a death toll on Friday of 60 killed across Iraq in three days of unrest, the vast majority of the deaths in the last 24 hours as the violence accelerated.

“It is sorrowful that there have been so many deaths, casualties and destruction,” Iraq’s most influential cleric, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, said in a letter read out by his representative during a sermon.

“The government and political sides have not answered the demands of the people to fight corruption or achieved anything on the ground,” said Sistani, who stays out of day-to-day politics but whose word is law for Iraq’s Shi’ites. “Parliament holds the biggest responsibility for what is happening.”

Populist cleric Moqtada al-Sadr, who leads the largest opposition bloc in parliament, ordered his lawmakers to suspend participation in the legislature until the government introduces a programme that would serve all Iraqis.

Many government officials and lawmakers are widely accused of siphoning off public money, unfairly awarding contracts in state institutions and other forms of corruption.

‘WE WALK AMONG YOU’

The violence is an unprecedented test for Adel Abdul Mahdi, a mild-mannered veteran politician who came to power last year as a compromise candidate backed by powerful Shi’ite groups that have dominated Iraq since the downfall of Saddam Hussein in 2003.

In his overnight address, Abdul Mahdi pledged reforms but said there was no “magic solution” to Iraq’s problems. He insisted politicians were aware of the suffering of the masses: “We do not live in ivory towers - we walk among you in the streets of Baghdad,” he said.

A young man in a crowd fleeing sniper shots at a central Baghdad square was scornful. “The promises by Adel Abdul Mahdi are to fool the people, and today they are firing live gunshots at us,” he said.

“Today this was a peaceful protest. They set up these barricades, and the sniper is sitting right there since last night.”

Police and medical sources told Reuters the death toll so far included 18 people killed in the southern city of Nassiriya, 16 in Baghdad, four in the southern city of Amara and four in Baquba as unrest spread north of the capital. Deaths were also reported in the southern cities of Hilla and Najaf.

Curfews were imposed in a number of cities. Authorities shut roads into the capital from the north and northeast and were sending reinforcements to Baghdad’s densely populated east. Military convoys were being sent to Nassiriya.

Late on Thursday protesters in Baghdad gathered in darkness by a bonfire set among the flaming wreckage of an armoured vehicle, across the Tigris River from the government compound.

“They are shooting live fire at the Iraqi people and the revolutionaries. We can cross the bridge and take them out of the Green Zone!” a man shouted to Reuters TV.

“Abdul Mahdi, they will cross the bridge. You better resign. Resign.” he shouted as the crowd behind him took up a chant that swept the Middle East during popular uprisings across the region in 2011: “The people demand the fall of the regime!”

‘REVOLUTION OF HUNGER’

The unrest occurs on the eve of Arbaeen, a Shi’ite pilgrimage which in recent years has drawn 20 million worshippers, trekking for days on foot across southern Iraq in the world’s biggest annual gathering, 10 times the size of the Mecca Hajj.

Some pilgrims were already taking to the roads on Friday, although in smaller numbers than in recent years. Iran has closed one of the border crossings used by millions of pilgrims. Qatar has told its citizens to stay away.

A senior Iranian cleric blamed the unrest on the United States and Israel, saying they aimed to thwart the pilgrimage.

Slideshow (7 Images)

The protests could grow if they receive formal backing from Sadr, who has long denounced corruption and the political elite. Parliament was set to hold a session dedicated to finding a solution, but Sadr’s faction was staying away.

Sadr has not called on his followers to join the protests, but his faction has expressed sympathy with their aims. One senior Sadrist politician, Awad Awadi, described the protests to Reuters as “a revolution of hunger”.WASHINGTON (Reuters) - U.S. officials pressured the Ukrainian government to launch investigations that might benefit President Donald Trump’s personal political agenda in exchange for a meeting of the two countries’ leaders, a cache of diplomatic texts released showed.

The exchanges were released on Thursday by Democrats in the House of Representatives as part of an investigation to determine whether they should impeach Trump for pressing Ukraine to probe former Vice President Joe Biden and his son, Hunter Biden, in connection with Ukrainian gas company Burisma.

Biden is a leading contender for the 2020 Democratic presidential nomination. His son was on the board of Burisma for a number of years.

Kurt Volker, who resigned last week as Trump’s special envoy to Ukraine, gave the messages to several House committees in a closed-door meeting on Thursday.

In July, Volker texted an adviser to Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy to tell him that a meeting between the countries’ two leaders was tied to Kiev’s agreement to investigate the 2016 U.S. election, according to the committees.

“Heard from the White House - assuming President Z convinces trump he will investigate/‘get to the bottom of what happened’ in 2016, we will nail down date for visit to Washington,” Volker wrote.

The mention of the 2016 election was a reference to a debunked conspiracy theory that evidence of Russian meddling in the campaign on Trump’s behalf was actually planted by anti-Russia Ukrainians.

The texts provide the first insider account of negotiations between Washington and Kiev over U.S. attempts to have Ukraine help Trump’s domestic political agenda, the issue which set off the impeachment inquiry against the president.

The impeachment investigation could lead to the approval of articles of impeachment - or formal charges - against Trump in the Democratic-controlled House. A trial on whether to remove him from office would then be held in the U.S. Senate.

Republicans who control the Senate have shown little appetite for ousting him.

Democrats are focusing on a July 25 telephone call between Trump and Zelenskiy in which the Republican president urges his Ukrainian counterpart to investigate Burisma and the Bidens.

Later messages between Volker and the Ukrainian aide, Andriy Yermak, showed duelling efforts to lock in a date for a Trump-Zelenskiy meeting and to issue a statement from Kiev announcing a “reboot” of relations along with the probes into Burisma and the 2016 election.

ROMNEY PUSHES BACK

Trump has said Biden and his son are “corrupt” but has shown no evidence to back that up. The president on Thursday went a step further in his attacks on Biden when he called on China to investigate the former vice president and Biden’s son who had business interests there.

U.S. senator and former Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney said on Friday it was “wrong and appalling” for Trump to push other nations to investigate Biden.

“When the only American citizen President Trump singles out for China’s investigation is his political opponent in the midst of the Democratic nomination process, it strains credulity to suggest that it is anything other than politically motivated,” Romney said on Twitter.

Trump said on Friday he would not tie a much-anticipated trade deal with China to his desire for Beijing to investigate Joe Biden.

“One thing has nothing to do with the other,” he said.

Biden leads in most opinion polls among the 19 Democrats seeking the party’s nomination to take on Trump in the November 2020 election. His campaign has blasted Trump’s efforts as desperate.

In a signal of how Kiev will handle investigations being watched in Washington, Ukrainian prosecutors said they would review 15 old probes related to Burisma’s founder but added that they were unaware of any evidence of wrongdoing by Biden’s son.

Separately, the White House plans to argue that House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, a Democrat, must have the full House vote to formally approve an impeachment inquiry, a source familiar with the effort said.

Without a vote, White House lawyers believe Trump, who has called the impeachment probe a “hoax,” can ignore lawmakers’ requests, the source said, meaning the federal courts would presumably have to render a decision and potentially slow the march towards impeachment.

U.S. President Donald Trump responds to reporters questions as he heads to the Marine One helicopter to fly to visit injured members of the U.S. military at Walter Reed National Military Medical Center in Maryland from the White House in Washington, October 4, 2019. REUTERS/Kevin Lamarque

A White House letter arguing Pelosi must hold a House vote could be sent to Capitol Hill as early as Friday, the source said. The Democratic-led House Intelligence Committee plans to issue more subpoenas in coming days.

“Congress must not back down from our duty to defend the Constitution,” Pelosi tweeted early on Friday. She accused Trump of ignoring warnings from America’s founders about foreign interference.

Trump’s this week has lashed out at Democrats, reporters and anyone else standing in his way to complain he was being unfairly accused and had done nothing wrong.PARIS (Reuters) - France’s anti-terror prosecutor has taken over the lead in investigating a knife attack in which an IT worker at police headquarters in Paris killed four co-workers before a police officer shot him dead.

French police and firefighters are seen in front of the Paris Police headquarters in Paris, France, October 3, 2019. REUTERS/Christian Hartmann

Officials have not said there was a terror motive behind Thursday’s attack in the centre of Paris near Notre-Dame cathedral, but the decision to hand the case to anti-terror prosecutors usually indicates a terrorism link is the focus of inquiries.

A judicial source close to the investigation said the anti-terror prosecutor took over the investigation following the interrogation of several of the attacker’s close associates, including his wife, and an examination of his cellphone.

The 45-year-old attacker, who had worked at the police headquarters for several years, had converted to Islam around 18 months ago, French media reported.

At lunchtime on Thursday he went on a rampage that spanned two floors of the headquarters building, killing three police officers and an administrative worker, and wounding at least one other, before being shot dead.

“Based on the information gathered at this stage in the investigation by investigators in the criminal unit, the national anti-terrorist prosecutor has this evening taken on the case,” a prosecutor’s office spokesman said.

The attack took place on the historic Ile de la Cite island in the River Seine. The area was locked down after the attack, with armed security personnel in camouflage gear patrolling a bridge over the river.

The attacker’s wife on Thursday was taken into police custody but not charged. During interviews with police, she described how her husband had heard voices on Wednesday night, according to the source close to the investigation.

Related Coverage French anti-terror prosecutor takes on investigation in Paris attack

A second source informed about the investigation said the attacker was believed to have had an “attack of insanity” that led him to carry out the attack.

The killer, identified by sources close to the investigation as Mickael H., had previously given his employers and co-workers no cause for concern about his behaviour, officials said.

MULTIPLE CASUALTIES

In the past four years, the French capital has been rocked by major attacks resulting in mass casualties.

Co-ordinated bombings and shootings by Islamist militants in November 2015 at the Bataclan theatre and other locations around Paris killed 130 people in the deadliest attacks in France since World War Two.

The knife attack unfolded just after midday on Thursday when the attacker, on the first floor of the police headquarters, used a kitchen knife to stab three policemen before taking the stairs down to the ground floor of the building.

On the staircase he came across two women staff, according to Le Parisien newspaper, which cited an internal police report on the incident. He stabbed both of them, fatally wounding one.

He then moved out into the courtyard of the police headquarters. There, according to the Parisien account, a policeman responsible for security at the building issued several warnings, then fired several shots at the attacker, including to his head, killing him.

Slideshow (2 Images)

The officer used a Heckler & Koch G-36 assault rifle, the newspaper reported.

The police officer who halted the attack had recently completed his training and had been in the job for only six days, Paris police chief Didier Lallement told reporters.HONG KONG (Reuters) - Hong Kong police shot and wounded a teenage boy on Friday, as violent protests erupted across the Chinese-ruled city hours after its embattled leader Carrie Lam invoked colonial-era emergency powers last used more than 50 years ago.

Lam, speaking at a news conference, said a ban on face masks would take effect on Saturday under the emergency laws that allow authorities to “make any regulations whatsoever” in whatever they deem to be in the public interest.

Nearly four months of anti-government protests have plunged Hong Kong into its biggest political crisis since its handover from Britain to China in 1997 under a “one country, two systems” formula that granted it autonomy and broad freedoms not enjoyed on the mainland.

The Beijing-backed leader said the banning of face masks was necessary to quell escalating violence and didn’t rule out the prospect of further measures if the unrest continued.

But the move only enraged protesters, who took to the streets as darkness fell to vent their anger.

Sirens echoed through the streets as protesters set fires, hurled petrol bombs at police and burned the Chinese national flag, in a direct challenge to authorities in Beijing.

Police said an officer in Yuen Long, a district in the outlying New Territories that saw fierce clashes in July, had fired a shot in self-defence after a protester threw a petrol bomb at him, setting him on fire.

Local media reported a 14-year-old boy had been shot and the city’s Hospital Authority said a 14-year-old was in a serious condition, without giving further details.

Around a hundred demonstrators besieged a Bank of China (HK) branch in the high-end shopping district of Causeway Bay, while across the harbour in Kowloon district protesters smashed the glass store front of a China Life branch.

Police fired volleys of tear gas to disperse protesters in flashpoint districts across the territory, including Causeway Bay, Sha Tin and Wong Tai Sin, underscoring the challenges facing authorities as the protests show no sign of letting up.

“COLOUR REVOLUTION”

China’s Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office praised Lam’s move in a statement that said the protests were evolving into a “colour revolution”, a term coined to refer to popular uprisings in Ukraine and other former Soviet states that swept away long-standing rulers, with interference from external forces.

The emergency laws allow curfews, censorship of the media, and control of harbours, ports and transport, although Lam did not specify any particular action that might follow beyond the mask ban.

Shopping malls, banks and shops across Hong Kong island had closed early in anticipation of violence as some protesters burned Chinese flags and chanted “You burn with us”, and “Hong Kongers, revolt”.

“The anti-mask law has become a tool of tyranny,” said Samuel Yeung, an 18-year-old university student, as crowds swelled in the main financial district of Central, beneath gleaming skyscrapers that house the Asia headquarters of companies including HSBC HSBC.L.

“They can make use of the emergency law to enact any policies or laws that the government wants. There’s no rule of law anymore. We can only be united and protest.”

What began as opposition to a proposed extradition law, which could have seen people sent for trial in mainland courts, has grown into a broad pro-democracy movement and a serious challenge to Chinese leader Xi Jinping.

The protesters are angry about what they see as creeping interference by Beijing in their city’s affairs. China dismisses accusations it is meddling and has accused foreign governments, including the United States and Britain, of stirring up anti-China sentiment.

Hong Kong Chief Executive Carrie Lam attends a news conference to discuss sweeping emergency laws at government office in Hong Kong, China October 4, 2019. REUTERS/Athit Perawongmetha

Many protesters wear masks to hide their identity due to fears employers could face pressure to take action against them as companies walk a tightrope between the anti-government activists and the city’s political masters in Beijing.

“Almost all protesters wear masks, with the intention of hiding their identity. That’s why they have become more unbridled,” said Lam.

“We can’t keep the existing regulations idle and let violence escalate and the situation continue to deteriorate.”

Lam described the territory as being in serious danger, but not in a state of emergency.

Pro-Beijing groups had been pushing for a mask ban, but it was not clear how the government would implement it in a city where many of its 7.4 million residents wear them every day to protect against infection following the outbreak of the deadly Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) in 2003.

“SOMETHING DRASTIC”

Authorities had already loosened guidelines on the use of force by police, according to documents seen by Reuters.

That came just before an escalation in violence on Tuesday, the 70th anniversary of the founding of the People’s Republic of China, when police fired about 1,800 volleys of tear gas, 900 rubber bullets and six live bullets - one of which hit an 18-year-old, the first time a protester had been hit be live fire.

The student, Tony Tsang, was shot at close range as he fought with a policeman. He is stable in hospital and has been charged with rioting, which carries a maximum 10-year sentence, and assaulting an officer.

Pro-democracy campaigners condemned Lam’s latest decision.

Slideshow (28 Images)

“This is an ancient, colonial set of regulations, and you don’t use them unless you can’t legislate anymore,” said Martin Lee, a veteran activist and one of the city’s most prominent lawyers. “Once you start, there’s no end to it.”

Some Hong Kong’s businesses, struggling with a dip in tourism and retail sales due to the protests, gave the law a warmer welcome.

“I agree with it at this point,” said businessman Allan Zeman, who is also an economic adviser to Lam. “You have to do something drastic to end the violence.”BEIRUT (Reuters) - Turkey-backed Syrian rebels pledged on Friday to back a potential cross-border offensive that Ankara has threatened to mount against Kurdish fighters in northeast Syria.

FILE PHOTO: Turkey's President Recep Tayyip Erdogan addresses the 74th session of the United Nations General Assembly at U.N. headquarters in New York City, New York, U.S., September 24, 2019. REUTERS/Lucas Jackson//File Photo

Ankara and Washington have agreed to set up a zone in northeast Syria along the border with Turkey, which wants to expel the Syrian Kurdish YPG militia from the frontier.

Turkey has accused the United States, which helped the YPG defeat Islamic State militants, of moving too slowly to establish the zone. The two countries are also at odds over how far it should extend into Syria and who should control it.

Turkey wants the zone to go 30 km (19 miles) inside Syria and has repeatedly warned it could launch its own operation.

President Tayyip Erdogan said on Tuesday that given the lack of progress Turkey had no choice but to act alone — his most direct indication yet of a military incursion.

U.S. support for YPG fighters has infuriated Ankara, which sees them as linked to the Kurdish PKK movement that has waged a decades-long insurgency inside Turkey.

“When it comes to the east of the Euphrates (river) ... it is our duty to fight,” Salim Idris, an official of the Turkey-backed Syrian opposition, told a news conference in southeast Turkey.

“We stand in full force in support of our Turkish brothers in fighting all forms of terrorism represented by the PKK gangs.”

With ties between the NATO allies already under strain, diplomats and analysts say Erdogan would be unwilling to anger Washington with a full-scale incursion into northeast Syria, where U.S. forces are stationed alongside the YPG.

But Turkey, which has twice launched military offensives with its insurgent allies in northern Syria in recent years, has been pressing for more efforts to set up the border zone.

U.S. and Turkish troops have so far carried out half a dozen joint air missions over northeast Syria and three land patrols, including one on Friday, in what Washington describes as “concrete steps” to address Ankara’s concerns.

Turkey, which backs insurgents holding tracts of territory in northwest Syria near its border, also has about a dozen military posts in the nearby Idlib region.

The Turkey-backed Syrian opposition also announced on Friday that a number of Idlib rebel factions were merging with the National Army, the main rebel grouping that Turkey supports in the northwest. The move may help widen Ankara’s influence in Idlib province, where militants formerly linked to al-Qaeda are the dominant force.PARIS (Reuters) - American artist Jeff Koons unveiled in Paris on Friday his sculpture Bouquet of Tulips, a tribute to the victims of militant Islamist attacks in the French capital in November 2015.

The 12-meter (40 ft) high piece depicts a giant hand squeezing a bouquet of eleven colourful tulips, a flower that in some cultures symbolises love.

Koons said he created the Bouquet of Tulips to show Americans’ support and solidarity for the French people after the attacks in which a total of 130 people were killed.

“I did, as a citizen in New York, experience 9/11 and the depression that hung over the city. It really took years for the city to be able to come to life again”, Koons told reporters.

Koons said that 80% of the proceeds from selling the copyright of the artwork will go to the victims’ families. The remaining 20% will be dedicated to its maintenance.

“The memory, commemorations, art, everything we do that can recall the memory of our loved ones, is vital”, said Dominique Kielemoes, a member of the “13onze15” victims’ association who lost her son in the attacks.

The inauguration of the artwork comes after years of dispute. The original venue for the work, near Paris landmark the Palais de Tokyo, was abandoned after officials decided it interrupted views of the Eiffel Tower, French media reported.

The venue finally chosen is near the Petit Palais, an art museum in central Paris.TUNIS (Reuters) - Detained Tunisian presidential candidate Nabil Karoui’s inability to campaign is affecting the credibility of the elections and the country’s image, interim president Mohamed Ennaceur said on Friday.

FILE PHOTO: Nabil Karoui, businessman and owner of the private channel Nessma TV, submits his candidacy for the presidential election in Tunis, Tunisia, August 2, 2019. REUTERS/Zoubeir Souissi/File Photo

Karoui, who will contest a runoff vote against independent Kais Saied on Oct. 13, was detained in August on suspicion of tax evasion and money laundering in a case brought three years ago by a transparency watchdog. Karoui denies any wrongdoing.

“One of the two candidates who won the first round is in prison and does not have the freedom to campaign or speak to his voters,” Ennaceur said in a brief televised statement.

“We will continue to ask all officials to find an honourable solution that respects the judiciary to overcome the unusual and strange situation,” he said.

Courts have rejected Karoui’s plea to be released pending a final verdict four times since his detention. The independent election commission has said he can contest the election so long as he is not found guilty of a crime.

No final verdict in the case appears imminent, however, and Karoui’s continued detention has prompted warnings from local and foreign election monitors that it denies the media mogul a fair playing field in the election.

Tunisia’s president has only limited powers, controlling foreign and defence policy, while a prime minister chosen by the parliament manages other portfolios.

Despite being in prison for the first round of the election, Karoui came second out of 26 candidates with 15.6% of the votes, behind law professor Kais Saied with 18.4%.

Ennaceur said he had been in touch with the Justice Minister and the head of the election commission about the situation.

WHAT NEXT?

Karoui’s unlicensed Nessma TV station has been broadcasting stories critical of the government throughout the election while promoting his philanthropy among poor Tunisians.

Karoui and Saied beat a number of veteran political leaders in what was seen as a rejection of the established forces that have dominated Tunisian politics since President Zine El-Abidine Ben Ali was ousted in a 2011 revolution.

Running from behind bars, Karoui has been unable to appear in televised election debates, the first in the country since the end of more than 50 years of autocratic rule, though his wife has been pounding the campaign trail on his behalf.

Constitutional experts in Tunisia have said it is not clear what will happen next. If Karoui loses narrowly, he could have grounds to appeal the result.

If he wins, it is unclear if he could be sworn in unless the judiciary allow him to attend parliament for the ceremony. If he’s later found guilty, it’s not clear whether he would qualify for presidential immunity for crimes committed before the vote.

A special court, mandated by the 2014 constitution to resolve such controversies, has not yet been set up. Its composition would need to be agreed by both the president and parliament, which has its own election on Sunday.

Meanwhile, further questions over Karoui and his place in the vote were raised this week by reports in regional media that his team had signed a lobbying contract with a Canadian company that may have breached electoral finance rules.WASHINGTON (Reuters) - Iran has not drawn back to a less threatening military posture in the region following the Sept. 14 attack on Saudi Arabia, the top U.S. admiral in the Middle East told Reuters, suggesting persistent concern despite a lull in violence.

FILE PHOTO: Vice Admiral James Malloy, commander of the U.S. Naval Forces Central Command (NAVCENT)/5th Fleet is seen during U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo's visit to the U.S. Naval Forces Central Command center in Manama, Bahrain, January 11, 2019. Andrew Caballero-Reynolds/Pool via REUTERS/File Photo

“I don’t believe that they’re drawing back at all,” Vice Admiral Jim Malloy, commander of the U.S. Navy’s Bahrain-based Fifth Fleet, said in an interview.

The United States, Saudi Arabia, Britain, France and Germany have publicly blamed the attack on Iran, which denies involvement in the strike on the world’s biggest crude oil-processing facility. The Iran-aligned Houthi militant group in Yemen has claimed responsibility.

Malloy did not comment on any U.S. intelligence guiding his assessment. But he acknowledged that he monitored Iranian activities closely, when asked if he had seen any concerning movements of Iranian missiles in recent weeks.

Malloy said he regularly tracks Iranian cruise and ballistic missile movements — “whether they’re moving to storage, away from storage.” He also monitors whether Iran’s minelaying capabilities head to distribution sites or away from them.

“I get a briefing of movements on a daily basis and then assessments as to what that could mean,” he said.

Relations between the United States and Iran have deteriorated sharply since President Donald Trump pulled out of the Iran nuclear accord last year and reimposed sanctions on its oil exports.

For months, Iranian officials issued veiled threats, saying that if Tehran were blocked from exporting oil, other countries would not be able to do so either.

However, Iran has denied any role in a series of attacks that have followed, including against tankers in the Gulf using limpet mines earlier this year.

“DENY IT IF YOU CAN”

Asked what the latest attack in Saudi Arabia showed him, Malloy said: “From my perspective, it is a land-based version of what they did with the mines ... quick, clandestine — deny it if you can.”

“Send a signal and harass and provoke,” he said.

His remarks came a week after the Pentagon announced it was sending four radar systems, a battery of Patriot missiles and about 200 support personnel to bolster Saudi defences — the latest in a series of U.S. deployments to the region this year amid escalating tensions.

Still, the latest deployment was more limited than had been initially under consideration.

Reuters has previously reported, for example, that the Pentagon eyed keeping an aircraft carrier in the Gulf region indefinitely, amid speculation that the USS Abraham Lincoln carrier strike group will soon need to wind up its deployment.

Malloy declined to speculate about future carrier deployments. But he acknowledged the tremendous value of aircraft carriers — as well as the ships in the strike groups that accompany an aircraft carrier.

That includes the contribution of destroyers now accompanying the USS Abraham Lincoln to a U.S.-led, multinational maritime effort known as Operation Sentinel.

It is meant to deter Iranian attacks at sea — and expose them if they occur.

SHINING A FLASHLIGHT

“What Sentinel seeks to do is shine a flashlight across that and make sure that if anything happens in the maritime, they will be exposed for that activity,” he said.

This includes by providing a surveillance and communication backbone to share intelligence with nations that have agreed to participate, which include Britain, Australia, Bahrain, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.

“We’ve created essentially a zone defence,” he said.

Washington first proposed the effort in the Gulf in June after accusing Iran of attacking oil tankers around the Strait of Hormuz, a critical maritime chokepoint. But the proposal was met with concern in some European capitals, already at odds with Washington over its withdrawal from the nuclear deal.

Malloy met Saudi Arabia’s naval commander on Sunday, assuring him of U.S. support following the Sept. 14th attack, which rattled global oil markets. He said U.S. support included intelligence sharing. “We are constantly in the process of tightening that information flow with them,” Malloy said.MEXICO CITY (Reuters) - The Mexican Supreme Court Justice who resigned this week likely did so because of questions about possible financial wrongdoing raised against him, President Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador said on Friday.

FILE PHOTO: Mexico's President Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador attends a news conference at the National Palace in Mexico City, Mexico, May 31, 2019. Picture taken May 31, 2019. REUTERS/Henry Romero

Justice Eduardo Medina Mora, 62, quit this week more than 10 years before his term was due to end, in the midst of a probe into his financial affairs that was initially started by the government’s financial intelligence unit.

Medina Mora, who in June rejected imputations made against him in a media report that he had engaged in financial irregularities, has yet to comment publicly on why he resigned.

Lopez Obrador was asked to give his opinion on what motivated Medina Mora during a regular news conference.

“I think the justice wants to deal with complaints submitted,” the president said, adding that the complaint was now in the hands of the attorney general’s office.

Lopez Obrador said he had not spoken to Medina Mora about his resignation and would not anticipate the outcome of the attorney general’s work.

He noted, however, that a complaint had been filed and said he had given instructions that whenever information came to light relating to money transfers that could prove suspicious, the attorney general’s office was to be handed the case immediately.

Medina Mora’s exit opens up the possibility of Lopez Obrador nominating a successor who is more sympathetic to the president’s policies than some longer-serving justices.

Critics of the popular 65-year-old president have raised concerns about the independence of the court under his administration, complaints that he has rejected.

Lopez Obrador, who lives frugally and prides himself on his austerity, became embroiled in a stand-off with the court days after taking office. Attacking the judges’ pay, he called them the “best paid public servants in the world.”

In March, the Senate picked the wife of a business ally of Lopez Obrador to fill another vacancy on the court.

Lopez Obrador, who has vowed to root out corruption in Mexico, said in June that the financial intelligence unit had received information on Medina Mora from U.S. authorities.

This information was later passed to the attorney general’s office as per his instructions, Lopez Obrador said.

Medina Mora, a onetime ambassador of Mexico to Britain and later to the United States, was picked for the Supreme Court by former president Enrique Pena Nieto in 2015.Demonstrators are seen while clashing with riot police during protests after Ecuador's President Lenin Moreno's government ended four-decade-old fuel subsidies, in Quito, Ecuador October 3, 2019. REUTERS/Ivan Castaneira

GUAYAQUIL, Ecuador (Reuters) - Ecuador’s President Lenin Moreno said on Friday he was open to talks with protesters but would not withdraw his decision to cut fuel subsidies that have triggered the worst unrest in years.

“Conversation, of course. There will be mechanisms to ease the impact on some sectors,” he told reporters in the coastal city of Guayaquil. “We’re ready to do that, but under no circumstances will we change the measure.”(Reuters) - Wall Street jumped on Friday as moderate jobs growth in September offered relief from a spate of dismal economic data this week that has rankled markets and fueled concerns that the world’s largest economy may be sliding into a recession.

A rally in technology stocks led by Apple Inc (AAPL.O) also helped lift the benchmark indexes at the end of a volatile week. After losing about 3% over Tuesday and Wednesday, the S&P 500 .SPX and Dow .DJI were on course for their best session in a month.

The Labor Department’s report showed nonfarm payrolls increased by 136,000 last month and the unemployment rate dropped to a 50-year low, but manufacturing payrolls declined for the first time in six months.

“It’s sort of a Goldilocks report: it’s not strong enough to move the Federal Reserve away from cutting rates at the end of October, but it’s not weak enough to make you concerned about the labor market or the consumer,” said Shawn Snyder, head of investment strategy at Citi Personal Wealth Management in New York.

Bets the Fed will cut interest rates have surged this week after a dramatic contraction in U.S. manufacturing, cooling private sector hiring and a fall in service sector activity pointed to widening fallout from the U.S.-China trade war.

Traders see a 77.5% chance that the central bank will lower borrowing costs at its policy meeting later this month, up from 40% on Monday. The Fed cut rates in September for the second time this year and said future reductions would be “data-dependent.”

With fears related to the trade war and its effect on the U.S. economy weighing on sentiment, the S&P 500 is up 1% over the past 12 months, and it is down about 3% from its record high close in July.

“Although market participants have been selling stocks and buying bonds, at the end of the day you say, ‘Gee, I still have to have some return for my investment, and that’s going to come from stocks,’” said Tom Martin, senior portfolio manager at GLOBALT Investments.

Apple Inc (AAPL.O) shares rose 2.8% after a report that the company would ramp up production of iPhone 11 models.

The S&P information technology index .SPLRCT climbed 1.5%, while the Philadelphia chip index .SOX advanced 1.3%.

At 2:31 p.m. ET, the Dow Jones Industrial Average .DJI was up 1.12% at 26,495.69 points, while the S&P 500 .SPX gained 1.11% to 2,943.02.

The Nasdaq Composite .IXIC jumped 1.14% to 7,961.77.

FILE PHOTO: Traders work on the floor at the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) in New York, U.S., October 3, 2019. REUTERS/Brendan McDermid

HP Inc (HPQ.N) tumbled 10.1% after the computer maker said it would cut up to 16% of its workforce as part of a restructuring plan that would result in an overall charge of $1 billion.

Advancing issues outnumbered declining ones on the NYSE by a 2.32-to-1 ratio; on Nasdaq, a 1.71-to-1 ratio favored advancers.

The S&P 500 posted 13 new 52-week highs and 1 new lows; the Nasdaq Composite recorded 14 new highs and 59 new lows.NEW YORK (Reuters) - Investors are preparing for more cautious capital investment outlooks from U.S. companies as worries mount heading into earnings season about the possibility of an economic recession.

FILE PHOTO: A Wall St. street sign is seen near the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) in New York City, U.S., September 17, 2019. REUTERS/Brendan McDermid/File Photo

Capital expenditure increases have been weaker than last year, when corporate tax cuts helped to bolster spending, and some strategists say they may even fall short of Wall Street’s expectations given the concerns about the economy and a prolonged trade war between the United States and China.

Less spending on technology, machinery and other equipment would suggest corporate executives are less confident in the economy than they had been, another potential negative for the stock market, which has fallen this week amid a series of weak economic reports.

Capital expenditures are expected to have increased just 3.0% in the third quarter from a year ago, which would be the lowest since the second quarter of 2017, when capex declined slightly, according to data based on analysts’ estimates compiled by Refinitiv’s research senior manager, David Aurelio.

That estimate drops to 1.1% in the fourth quarter, and year-over-year declines are projected in some quarters of 2020.

“It’s very likely that capex spending is going to be below expectations,” said Kristina Hooper, chief global market strategist at Invesco in New York. “We are in a state of heightened economic policy uncertainty. That tamps down business investment.”

Strategists said spending plans will be of particular interest as S&P 500 .SPX companies discuss their results for the third quarter in the weeks ahead.

The reporting period begins with big banks including JPMorgan Chase (JPM.N) and others reporting on Oct. 15.

Results overall are expected to be relatively weak, with analysts forecasting earnings for S&P 500 companies to have declined 2.7% in the third quarter from a year ago, based on Refinitiv’s data.

Recent dismal economic indicators have fueled concerns that the United States was flirting with a recession.

Upbeat jobs data offered some relief for investors on Friday, but it came on the heels of a report this week showing manufacturing activity plunged to a more than 10-year trough in September. Other data showed U.S. services sector activity slowed to a three-year low in September.

“There is a correlation between CEO confidence and capex. And right now we’ve seen CEO confidence decrease, so again it’s going to be a challenging environment for companies to go ahead and spend,” said Keith Lerner, chief market strategist at SunTrust Advisory Services in Atlanta.

While the trade war has eroded business confidence, easing monetary policy is expected to help because it reduces borrowing costs for businesses.

The U.S. central bank cut rates last month after reducing borrowing costs in July for the first time since 2008. Bets the Federal Reserve will cut rates later this month by 25 basis points were at about 77% on Friday, compared to 39.6% on Monday, according to CME Group’s FedWatch tool.

“This talk of whether or not we’re going into a recession, that enforces prudence” by companies, said Quincy Krosby, chief market strategist at Prudential Financial, based in Newark, New Jersey. “Ultimately what they’re worried about is revenue growth.”NEW YORK (Reuters) - The dollar slipped on Friday after earlier posting gains following a U.S. jobs report that underperformed expectations but was solid overall, as investors remained cautious about political risk in the United States and ongoing trade negotiations with China.

United States one dollar bills are seen on a light table at the Bureau of Engraving and Printing in Washington November 14, 2014. REUTERS/Gary Cameron/Files

The greenback hit session highs against the yen and euro following the jobs report, after trading lower for most of the session. But by afternoon trading, the dollar’s rally faded.

Data showed that U.S. nonfarm payrolls increased by 136,000 jobs last month. August data was revised to show 168,000 jobs created instead of the previously reported 130,000 positions. Economists polled by Reuters had forecast payrolls would increase by 145,000 jobs in September.

The unemployment rate dropped to a near 50-year low of 3.5%.

“Given that market expectations have shifted after the ADP (private payrolls) and ISM (manufacturing and services), people were bracing for something worse than this. So this is in the ballpark of what is acceptable,” said Shaun Osborne, chief market strategist, at Scotiabank in Toronto.

“But there are other issues here for the dollar aside from the Fed easing, such as the U.S. political backdrop. And we’re still looking at the funding tightness issue,” he added.

A drop in U.S. unemployment in September pushed traders of U.S. short-term interest rate futures on Friday to pare bets the Federal Reserve will cut rates at both of its two upcoming meetings.

The jobs data was initially a big relief to dollar bulls after two weak reports this week that heightened U.S. recession fears.

On Thursday, a survey from the U.S. Institute for Supply Management (ISM) showed its non-manufacturing activity index falling to 52.6 in September, the lowest since August 2016.

The non-manufacturing data came on the heels of ISM’s manufacturing survey on Tuesday that showed activity plunging to more than 10-year lows.

The jobs report impact, however, was short-lived as investors grappled with U.S. political tensions.

Diplomatic texts released late Thursday showed that U.S. officials pressured their Ukrainian counterparts to launch investigations that could benefit President Donald Trump’s personal political agenda in exchange for a meeting between the two countries’ leaders.

The exchanges were released by Democrats in the House of Representatives as part of an impeachment investigation to determine whether Trump pressed Ukraine to probe former Vice President Joe Biden and his son, Hunter Biden, in connection with Ukrainian gas company Burisma.

Trade talks with China were also in focus, with both U.S. and Chinese officials set to meet next week.

In early afternoon trading, the dollar index .DXY was down 0.1% at 98.805, slipping against the yen to 106.82 yen JPY=.

The euro gained 0.2% versus the dollar to $1.0982 EUR=.