GENEVA (Reuters) - The global average temperature is set to rise to at least 1.2 to 1.3 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels over the next five years, a World Meteorological Organization (WMO) official said on Monday, close to a limit adopted in a global treaty.

The prediction comes as governments are due to meet in New York for the U.N. Climate Action Summit to build on their pledges from the 2015 Paris Agreement, which aims to cap the global temperature rise at 1.5 degrees.

The agreement, adopted by almost 200 nations, set a goal of limiting warming to “well below” a rise of 2C above pre-industrial times while “pursuing efforts” for the tougher 1.5C goal.

A rise of 2C is expected to wipe out more than 99 percent of coral reefs and melt most of the sea ice in the Arctic.

“Basically we are on track to reach at least 1.2- 1.3 degrees centigrade (above pre-industrial levels) over the next five years,” said Omar Baddour, WMO senior scientific officer, in response to a Reuters question at a Geneva news conference.

“It needs drastic actions,” he added.

The comments came after the U.N. agency released a report on Sunday showing that the period from 2015 to 2019 was set to be the warmest five-year period on record, rising by 0.2 degrees Celsius over 2011-2015.

“Not only are these statistics alarming they dispel any false sense of security that maybe we will muddle through this,” said Maxx Dilley, director of the climate prediction and adaptation division of the WMO, told journalists.

Slideshow (5 Images)

“There is going to have to be a dramatic scale up in the level of ambition and as well as in the level of actual follow through on the current policies that are intending to address this,” he added.

The WMO report also showed record carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere recorded over the same period, with the pace of carbon dioxide growth up 20 percent versus the last five-year assessment.

There is a lag in the period that the world’s climate responds to carbon dioxide and other gasses, meaning that the emissions produced today can affect temperatures 20 years later, Dilley added, locking in the warming trend.






FILE PHOTO: Russian President Vladimir Putin speaks during his meeting with heads of foreign companies on the sidelines of the Saint Petersburg International Economic Forum (SPIEF-2019) in St. Petersburg, Russia, June 7, 2019. Yuri Kochetkov/Pool via REUTERS

MOSCOW (Reuters) - Russian President Vladimir Putin has approved a government proposal to bankroll the modernisation of the armed forces in the breakaway Georgian region of Abkhazia, a government document published online showed on Monday.

Georgia lost control of the Black Sea region of Abkhazia after an inter-ethnic conflict which followed the collapse of the Soviet Union.

Russia is one of only a handful of countries to recognise Abkhazia’s independence, something it decided to do in 2008 after it won a short war against Georgia over the fate of another Georgian breakaway region.

Russia, which has its own troops on the ground, will sign an agreement to finance the modernisation of Abkhazia’s armed forces after detailed negotiations are over, the government document said.

Georgia condemned the move and called the agreement between Russia and Abkhazia illegal.

“This is another illegal step by the Russian Federation to integrate the Georgian regions into the Russian political and military space, which is a continuation of Russia’s annexed policy,” said Vladimer Konstantinidi, Georgia’s foreign ministry spokesman.

Georgia, which aspires to join the European Union and NATO, has not had diplomatic relations with Russia since 2008.

It wants to get back control of Abkhazia and another breakaway region, South Ossetia, and for Russian troops to leave.






FILE PHOTO - U.S. Deputy Secretary of State John J. Sullivan arrives at the Lopez Palace in Asuncion, Paraguay September 6, 2019. REUTERS/Jorge Adorno

UNITED NATIONS (Reuters) - The United States will co-host an event on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly on China’s treatment of Muslim minorities including ethnic Uighurs, the U.S. State Department said in a statement on Monday.

The event on Tuesday will be hosted by U.S. Deputy Secretary of State John Sullivan and will feature personal stories of victims, the statement said. It did not identify other hosts.

“China’s repression campaign includes, among other abuses, the mass detention of more than one million individuals in internment camps since April 2017,” the State Department said.

U.N. experts and activists say at least 1 million Uighurs and members of other largely Muslim minority groups have been detained in camps in the remote Xinjiang region. Beijing describes complexes in Xinjiang as “vocational training centres” helping to stamp out extremism and give people new skills.

Washington has been weighing how to confront China on the issue at the annual gathering of world leaders in New York this week. On Sunday, U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo urged all countries in the world to resist China’s demands to repatriate Uighurs.

Pompeo said Beijing’s campaign in the western Chinese region of Xinjiang was an “attempt to erase its own citizens.”

Pompeo and U.S. Vice President Mike Pence could also address China’s treatment of the Uighurs at events this week, but a final decision on any U.S. remarks “is expected to hinge on how the trade issue is going,” an administration official said last week. China and the United States are fighting a trade war and are set to resume trade talks in October.






16-year-old Swedish Climate activist Greta Thunberg speaks at the 2019 United Nations Climate Action Summit at U.N. headquarters in New York City, New York, U.S., September 23, 2019. REUTERS/Carlo Allegri

UNITED NATIONS (Reuters) - Swedish teenage climate activist Greta Thunberg told world leaders at the opening of a United Nations conference on Monday that they had stolen her childhood with “empty words.”

“You have stolen my dreams and my childhood with your empty words,” Thunberg said at a U.N. climate change summit, admonishing adults for not doing enough to protect the environment.






Mels, Switzerland (Reuters) - Hundreds of climate activists paid their respects to a Swiss glacier on Sunday that is due to disappear over the next decade, the victim of a warming environment.

The Pizol glacier, now at less than a tenth of a square km, in the Glarus Alps in eastern Switzerland has been retreating as temperatures climb. Located about 2,600 metres (8530 ft) above sea level, the glacier is due to vanish completely by 2030.

“I have climbed up here countless times,” said Matthias Huss glaciologist at ETH Zurich university, addressing the people who joined the march. “It is like the dying of a good friend.”

At roughly 0.06 square km (0.02 square miles), the glacier is just a fraction of its area in 1987 when scientists recorded it at 0.32 square km. Just four years ago, its area was put at 0.1 square km, according to the Global Glacier Change Bulletin.

The gathering in Switzerland, which has about 1,500 glaciers, mirrors an action in August when activists and others in Iceland commemorated a melted glacier there.

In Switzerland, climate change activism has been rising, including action this year in which dozens of people were arrested after blocking entrances to Swiss banks some people blame for their role in financing energy projects that are reliant on fossil fuels.

Moreover, the country famous for its direct democracy may soon vote on going climate neutral, after organisers of a petition drive called “the Glacier Initiative” collected 120,000 signatures needed to put the measure on the ballot.

“We can’t save the Pizol glacier anymore,” said Huss. But if people acted now, many of the negative effects of climate change could be contained. “Let’s do everything we can, so that we can show our children and grandchildren a glacier here in Switzerland a hundred years from now.”






KATOWICE, Poland (Reuters) - Poland’s biggest coal company, state-run PGG, agreed on Monday to spend 44 million zlotys ($11 million) on one-off bonuses for miners this year, its chief executive said after talks with trade unions which demanded more cash as an election looms.

FILE PHOTO: General view of Wujek Coal Mine is seen during sunset in Katowice, Poland October 16, 2108. REUTERS/Kacper Pempel/File Photo

Pressure for salary increases is building in coal mining and other industries before a parliamentary election on Oct. 13. The ruling Law and Justice (PiS) has pledged to increase the minimum wage and raise teachers’ salaries, among other promises.

Coal has fuelled Poland’s economy for years and a promise to support it has been used in previous political campaigns, due to the strength of the coal unions and a large mining workforce.

PiS won an election in 2015 partly on promises to sustain coal at a time when PGG almost collapsed on low coal prices and rising costs. Since then, prices have rebounded, the industry has been restructured and the number of miners declined.

Attitudes among Poles have also shifted in recent years due to increased awareness of coal’s impact on the environment.

“We can afford to pay out such an amount for the employees and this will not have an impact on our investment spending planned for this year,” PGG Chief Executive Tomasz Rogala told reporters.

While PGG management board agreed extra bonuses would be paid in 2019, the unions and management have agreed to revive talks on 2020 salary increases in November, after PGG third-quarter results.

“We have achieved what was most important to us. For sure we will revive talks after PGG third quarter results,” said Boguslaw Hutek, the head of Solidarity union at PGG.

PGG employs around 42,000 people and its 2018 net profit stood at 493 million zlotys.

(This story corrects election date to Oct. 13 in paragraph 2)






MOSCOW (Reuters) - Russia said it would implement the 2015 Paris Agreement to fight climate change after Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev on Monday approved a government resolution signifying Moscow’s final acceptance of the deal.

Russia's Prime Minister and Chairman of the United Russia political party Dmitry Medvedev visits a regional branch of the party in Saint Petersburg, Russia September 9, 2019. Sputnik/Ekaterina Shtukina/Pool via REUTERS ATTENTION EDITORS - THIS IMAGE WAS PROVIDED BY A THIRD PARTY.

The same resolution said Russia would not technically ratify the accord however due to a legal nuance. Medvedev said Moscow would adapt the accord to existing legal norms. It was unclear what, if any, the legal implications of failing to technically ratify the pact were.

Russia is the world’s fourth largest emitter of greenhouse gases and the biggest emitter not to have ratified the landmark global climate deal.

In Monday’s government resolution, Russia said it did not need to ratify the agreement because Moscow had already undertaken to honour its commitments when it signed the deal in April 2016.

The government resolution was signed by Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev and dated Sept. 21.

Deputy Prime Minister Alexei Gordeyev said it was important for Russia to be part of the Paris accord so that it had a voice when it came to deciding any new measures to regulate greenhouse gas emissions.

“We get the chance to fully participate in shaping the modern global climate agenda,” said Gordeyev. “And any regulatory measures that are drawn up will have to take into consideration our national interests as much as possible.”

He said that legislation aimed at curbing greenhouse gas emissions had already been drawn up by the economy ministry and that he expected it to be adopted this year.

Medvedev said Russia had a lot of work to do if it was to transform its economy into a low-carbon one.

“It’s important and useful but demands quite significant investment,” Medvedev said of the Paris accord. “So this problem is quite closely linked with our economic development.”

Russia has previously expressed disappointment over a decision by U.S. President Donald Trump to pull Washington from the Paris pact, but said it still regards the accord as important despite the U.S. absence.






JAKARTA (Reuters) - Indonesian police said on Monday anti-terrorism officers had arrested eight Islamist militants and uncovered bomb-making material suspected of being prepared for an attack on police headquarters in the capital Jakarta.

The suspects were members of the Islamic State-inspired Jemaah Ansharut Daulah (JAD) group, national police spokesman Iqbal Alqudusy said in a statement.

“They had prepared all the materials...to make a bomb and carry out an attack on police headquarters and police on duty,” said Alqudusy.

During multiple raids in and around the capital, police seized firearms, as well as a high pressure cooker that would be filled with nails and bolts, as well as the unstable explosive powder known as TATP, or triacetone triperoxide.

Indonesia, which is the world’s biggest Muslim-majority country, is grappling with a resurgence in militancy.

The government scrambled to tighten its anti-terrorism laws after a series of suicide bombings linked to JAD cells killed more than 30 people in the city of Surabaya last year.

Hundreds of people have been detained under the new laws since the beginning of 2019.






FILE PHOTO: U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres speaks at the R20 Austrian World Summit in Vienna, Austria, May 28, 2019. REUTERS/Lisi Niesner/File Photo

UNITED NATIONS (Reuters) - United Nations Secretary-General Antonio Guterres announced on Monday the formation of a constitutional committee for Syria, a long-awaited step in a stalled peace process.

“It will be facilitated by the United Nations in Geneva,” Guterres told reporters, adding that it would be convened in the coming weeks. The United Nations sees the committee as a next step in efforts to find a political solution to end the more than eight-year war in Syria.






KHARTOUM (Reuters) - Sudan’s transitional government will start a nine-month economic rescue plan next month aimed at curbing rampant inflation while ensuring supplies of basic goods and is asking the World Bank for $2 billion (£1.61 billion), the country’s finance minister said on Monday.

Shortages of bread, fuel and medicine coupled with hefty price rises sparked protests that led to the toppling of longtime ruler Omar al-Bashir in April.

The economy has remained in turmoil as politicians negotiated a power-sharing deal between the military and civilians. The government was appointed this month.

Finance Minister Ibrahim Elbadawi told reporters the new plan would restructure the budget and tackle inflation but leave bread and petrol subsidies in place until at least June 2020.

“It aims ... to restructure the banking sector, rationalise government spending, address the state’s financial burden and review tax exemptions, because 60% of economic activity is tax exempt,” Elbadawi said. It would also combat corruption.

The transitional government, led by Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok, is Sudan’s first since Bashir’s overthrow.

The government needs billions of dollars to import basic goods such as fuel and flour. Fuel subsidies account for 8% of gross domestic product, Elbadawi said.

The government wants to replace commodity subsidies with direct cash transfers to poor families by the end of the rescue plan, he added.

Hamdok, now in New York, will ask the World Bank for $2 billion in funding, Elbadawi said. Khartoum has asked the bank to send three Sudanese experts as secondees and to help pay their salaries to improve central bank and finance ministry performance during the political transition.

Sudan has so far been unable to tap the International Monetary Fund and World Bank for support because the United States still lists the country as a state sponsor of terrorism.

“American officials have informed us that removing Sudan from the U.S. terrorism list is complicated because it is tied to Congress and could take nine months to a year,” Elbadawi said.

The new economic plan aims to address the country’s weakening currency, he said. The Sudanese pound is officially set at 45 to the dollar, but on the black market on Monday it was trading at 69 pounds. Elbadawi said he hoped to unify the two exchange rates by June.

Hamdok said in an interview with Reuters shortly after his appointment in August that Sudan needed $8 billion in foreign aid over the next two years.






